Chapter 7 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 7-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adopted state codes means all codes and standards adopted by reference in this chapter. 
Approved means approved by the building official. 
Board means the board of appeals. 
Building official means the officer or other person designated by the director with the authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code. 
Director means the director of the community development department or designee. 
Emergency means any situation resulting in imminent danger to the public health or safety or the loss of an essential governmental service. 
End user means the ultimate consumer of a product, especially the one for whom a product has been designed. 
Independent means not affiliated in any way with the applicant for the variance or any city or county official or employee. 
Justifiable cause means a reason given by the applicant or permit holder that in the opinion of the director is valid and sufficient. Justifiable cause does not include delay that is created by the applicant or permit holder or delay that reasonably could have been avoided by the applicant or permit holder. 
Ordinary repairs mean nonstructural repairs to a building or structure or repairs to a mechanical system, gas system, plumbing system, electrical system, and energy conservation system for which the codes specify no minimum requirements or standards or do not address the repair. The term "ordinary repairs" does not include additions, alterations, relocations, or replacements to buildings or structures, water supplies, sewers, drains, drain leaders, gas, soil waste, vent or other similar piping, electrical systems or wiring, mechanical systems, or other work for which a permit is required by the Code or the building official. 
Portable equipment means equipment not permanently install or fixed in place. 
Pre-qualified alternate registered engineer means a registered design professional recommended by the city council or its designee, or the board of appeals and approved by the city council for compliance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26 et seq. 
Protective means a method or material that provides the same or greater protection of health, safety, life or property as provided by the construction requirements set forth in this Code. 
Registered design professional means architects, civil, structural, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing engineers, and others whose services require licensing by the state. 
Technical codes means collectively the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas Code, National Electrical Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International Fire Code, and International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted, amended, and mandated by the State of Georgia along with amendments; the International Property Maintenance Code, Rules of Office of Insurance and Fire Safety Commissioner Chapter 120-3-20; National Fire Protection Code 101; and local supplemental codes as adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-1, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-05-06, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 7-2. Building numbering.
(a)	Assigning numbers; size; installation; inspections. Street numbers will be assigned for all buildings and structures. Numbers must be erected and displayed in front of the project on a board with permanent numbers not smaller than two inches. Numbers must be in place at the beginning of the job before the footing inspection is made and be continuously displayed thereafter until the job is complete and all final inspections have been made. No inspection will be made where street numbers are not in place as required in this section. Contractors and others shall always refer to the street number when calling the community development department for an inspection request or information. 
(b)	Designation of street numbers. Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public streets and street numbers or building numbers for dwelling units and places of business within apartment projects and nonresidential developments located on private streets shall be assigned by the department in accordance with its administrative procedures. 
(c)	Posting. All buildings, including, but not limited to, one- and two-family dwelling units, multifamily dwelling units, and each place of business, shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the public or private street or road frontage. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, §§ 7-500—7-502, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Secs. 7-3—7-22. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL CODES
Sec. 7-23. Adopted state minimum standards codes.
(a)	Generally. As future new editions or amendments of the codes listed in this article are adopted by the board of community affairs of the state department of community affairs, they shall become a part of or replacement for the adopted codes, rules and regulations or standards and shall become enforceable as prescribed without separate adoption by the governing authority. All new construction, installations, repairs, or alterations shall be in conformance with the current edition of the following codes and with state amendments as currently adopted by the board of community affairs of the state department of community affairs: 
(1)	International Building Code. 
(2)	International Residential Code. 
(3)	International Plumbing Code 
(4)	International Mechanical Code. 
(5)	International Fuel Gas Code. 
(6)	National Electrical Code. 
(7)	International Energy Conservation Code, 
(8)	International Fire Code. 
(9)	International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(b)	Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the above-stated codes shall be considered an integral part of the code without separate adoption. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by a code test, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall govern. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(c)	Appendices. The appendices included in any code adopted pursuant to this chapter are not intended for enforcement unless specifically referenced in this chapter or specifically included in this Code. 
(d)	Referenced codes and standards. The adopted state codes adopted pursuant to this article shall be considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such adoption. Where differences occur between the provisions of this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-51, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-11-01, § I(Attch.), 11-12-2019)
Sec. 7-24. Amendments to the International Building Code and International Residential Code.
(a)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the International Building Code adopted by reference in section 7-23 is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: International Building Code: 
(1)	Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirely. 
(2)	Revise section 1612.3 to include "The flood insurance study for DeKalb County countywide FIRM and FIS effective 8-15-2019." 
(b)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the International Residential Code adopted by reference in section 7-23 is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)	International Residential Code: 
a.	Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety. 
b.	Table 301.2(1) in chapter 3 shall be completed by adding the following information to the blank spaces: 
1.	Ground snow load (lbs. per square foot) — 8. 
2.	Wind speed (fastest mile) — 90. 
3.	Seismic design category B. 
4.	Weathering — moderate. 
5.	Frost line depth — Yes, 12-inch minimum. 
6.	Termite damage — Yes, very heavy. 
7.	Decay damage — Yes, moderate to severe. 
8.	Winter design temp. for heating facilities — (22 degrees Fahrenheit). 
9.	Flood hazard - as defined in Chapter 14. 
(2)	Local ordinance requirements supplemental to the state-adopted International Residential Code: 
a.	A set of plans that includes building, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical plans and the site plan as required in section 7-24(b)(2)b shall be maintained on the construction site at all times. 
b.	A site plan or staking survey prepared and sealed by a registered engineer or land surveyor shall be submitted at the time of the residential footing or slab inspection and prior to the pouring of slab or foundation walls. Survey shall show the setbacks from all property lines. Setbacks shall comply with all minimum zoning ordinance requirements and/or legally acquired variances. 
c.	Upon request by the director, written certification shall be provided by the permittee or property owner that all concrete reinforcing and support stirrups comply with CSRI specifications. 
d.	Upon request, batch tickets shall be provided to the director for each concrete pour. No more than one gallon of water shall be added to each cubic yard of concrete mix during the concrete pour. All soil under a concrete slab shall be properly compacted and shall be covered with a minimum of six mil polyethylene film to prevent the leaching of water from the concrete pour into the soil. The director may request the permittee, at the permittee's expense, to have any concrete slab and/or footing tested by an independent third party approved by the director. The director may take any and all appropriate action including, but not limited to, requiring removal of the concrete at the permittee or property owner's expense by a date certain if the director determines that: 
1.	The concrete was poured in a manner contrary to this section or other law; 
2.	That the concrete was poured contrary to ACI specifications; or 
3.	That the slab or footings are defective as verified by the third-party testing. 
e.	The skirt of the concrete apron for any driveway shall rise to no less that eight inches above the flowline in the curb and the gutter and shall be eight feet from the face of the curb at the flowline. 
f.	All residential driveways, stops, patios, and walkways shall bear on properly compacted soil, foundation ledges or be doweled at slab. Maximum residential driveways slopes shall not exceed 20 percent grade. At the entrance of a garage, the garage floor shall be elevated two inches above the driveway or a drainage system approved by the director shall be installed at the entrance to the garage. Residential garages and carports shall contain not less than 19 feet six inches of actual automobile parking depth. Upon completion of construction of any driveway or garage, the engineer of record shall provide written certification to the director that such driveway and/or garage complies with the requirements of this Code, including the requirements of this section. 
g.	All residential basements and crawl spaces shall be damp proofed and positively drained regardless of water table and/or soil conditions. 
h.	All residential bathroom wet floor areas shall be covered and protected by non-absorbent floor coverings. Dressing areas may transition to carpet. 
i.	All roofing shingles shall be installed and maintained during the entire construction per manufacturer's recommendations. Roofing shall be installed and sloped according to the manufacturer specifications using flashing and waterproof caulking to prevent leakage and moisture accumulation. Drip edges shall be installed at all roofing edges. 
j.	Roof framing shall be tied securely to wall framing, using hurricane type connections. 
k.	Residential gutters shall be continuously sloped for proper drainage and shall not contain depressions or swags to collect standing water. Drainage from gutter outlets shall be directed to a designed or natural drainage system that does not adversely affect adjacent property or buildings. 
l.	Seven-sixteenth inch structural wood sheathing or other approved material shall be installed as underlayment on all residential exterior walls where vinyl siding is to be installed. All vinyl siding shall be a minimum material thickness of 0.044 inch and shall be installed by hand nailing using galvanized roofing nails. 
m.	A weather-resistant barrier shall be required as an underlay between all exterior siding or veneer. All exterior wood surfaces and fastener holes shall be sealed, treated and painted according to the manufacturer's specifications. All exterior wood and cementitious siding surfaces shall be sealed and painted according to the manufacturer's specifications. All exterior fasteners shall be coated and shall meet or exceed manufacturer specifications and standards for the specific application. 
n.	All windows and doors shall be installed with flashing to create a drain plain. All flashing shall be cut into adjoining surfaces where applicable. Light colored roofing and solar orientation principles shall be encouraged for use in all buildings. Flashing and caulking shall be installed at all exterior surfaces, roofs, or appurtenances that are connected to another surface and such flashing and caulking shall extend to abutting structures. 
o.	Crickets shall be installed behind all chimneys and shall extend the full width of the chimney chase. 
p.	A 3.5-inch weep screed shall be installed at the bottom edge of the lath on all exterior hard coat stucco. The weep screen shall be mounted four inches above finished grade and two inches above impervious surfaces (walkways, patios, and driveways). Metallic pipes penetrating stucco must be wrapped with materials to prevent corrosion of the pipe. Expansion joints shall be installed between floors. 
q.	All topsoil shall be saved, protected and shall only be reused as topsoil but not used for fill. All disturbed areas on residential lots shall be totally sodded or landscaped with approved landscaped materials. All building material that are rendered unusable by natural elements (i.e., water, sun, or soil) in the opinion of the director shall be immediately removed upon discovery and replaced with satisfactory material at the permittee or property owner's expense. 
r.	Outside water-using or producing appliances such as an air conditioning cooling coil condensate shall be piped six inches away from the dwelling unit foundation. 
s.	Verification of subterranean termite control shall be submitted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-52, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-11-01, § I(Attch.), 11-12-2019)
Sec. 7-25. Amendments to the International Plumbing Code and International Mechanical Code.
(a)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the International Plumbing Code adopted by reference in section 7-23 is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)	International Plumbing Code. 
a.	Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety. 
b.	Revise section 305.4.1; insert "12 inches." 
c.	Revise section 305.7 to include "Components of a plumbing system installed along alleyways, in yards, or lawns, driveways, parking garages, or other locations exposed to damage shall be recessed into the ground, wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner." 
(2)	Local supplemental ordinance requirements to the state-adopted Plumbing Code. 
a.	All exterior sewer drain clean outs shall be cut back to finished grade level on all residences. 
b.	Waiver for an exemption to the requirements for the installation of high efficiency plumbing fixtures relative to any new construction and to the repair or renovation of an existing building may be given under the following conditions: 
1.	When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets, or shower heads within such existing building; 
2.	When such plumbing or sewerage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets, or shower heads required by this part were installed; 
3.	When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
4.	When units to be installed are: 
(i)	Specifically designed for use by person with disabilities; 
(ii)	Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
(iii)	Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the International Mechanical Code adopted by reference in section 7-23 is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)	International Mechanical Code: Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety. 
(2)	Local supplemental ordinance requirements to the state-adopted Mechanical Code. 
a.	Residential heating and air conditioning systems (if air conditioning is installed) shall be sized to address all finished areas (except garages). 
b.	Attic ventilation utilizing continuous ridge and soffit vents, cap vents or turbine vents shall be required unless building envelope extends to rafters. 
c.	Factory seams on low pressure systems do not have to be sealed when the minimum air leakage requirements of the Georgia State Energy Code for buildings have been met for the entire duct system. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-53, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-11-01, § I(Attch.), 11-12-2019; Ord. No. 2023-05-02, § I, 5-9-2023)
Sec. 7-26. Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code, the state-adopted National Electrical Code, and the International Energy Conservation Code.
(a)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the International Fuel Gas Code adopted by reference in section 7-23 is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)	International Fuel Gas Code: Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety. 
(2)	Local supplemental ordinance requirements to the state-adopted Gas Code. Gas lines shall be inspected and pressure tested at the rough-in inspection. 
(b) (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the state-adopted National Electrical Code adopted by reference in section 7-23 is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(2)	Local supplemental ordinance requirements to the state-adopted National Electrical Code. 
a.	Electrical fences consisting of an electrically charged conductor or other electrically charged devices shall be permitted to be used only for the confinement of farm animals. Only fence chargers of the intermittent current type listed by a nationally recognized independent testing laboratory shall be permitted to be used. Electrical fences shall not be used except by special permission after written application to the director. 
b.	When a residential service change is installed, all receptacle outlets that are required under the current state-adopted National Electrical Code to be GFI outlets shall be modified to provide such protection, including bathrooms, kitchen counters, and outdoor receptacles. 
c.	A reinspection permit and reinspection shall be required before power is restored to any residence or building where power has been disconnected for six months or more. 
(c)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the state-adopted International Energy Conservation Code adopted by reference in section 7-23 is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)	The provisions of article III of this chapter shall supplement chapter 1 of the International Energy Conservation Code and in the event of conflict the provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code shall take precedence and govern. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-54, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-27. State fire safety rules adopted.
The state minimum fire safety standards of the state safety fire commissioner as set forth in Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. § 120-3-3 et seq. for the prevention of loss of life and property from fire, panic from fear of fire, explosions or related hazards in buildings, structures, occupancies, and facilities are adopted as if fully set forth herein. The department of community development shall administer and enforce those provisions of these rules as relate to plan review and inspection of proposed buildings and structures and issuance of permanent and temporary certificates of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-18, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-11-01, § I(Attch.), 11-12-2019)
Secs. 7-28—7-57. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 7-58. Conformance to construction, installation, repair, and maintenance standards.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the construction, erection, installation, alteration, demolition, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of buildings or structures, plumbing, mechanical, gas, and electrical systems within the city. Any and all requirements of this article shall expressly include any and all technical codes as amended by the city pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-26, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-59. Applicability.
(a)	Generally. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters affecting or related to buildings, structures, equipment or systems as set forth in section 7-58. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. 
(b)	Existing installations. Buildings, structures, plumbing, mechanical and electrical systems lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to have their use and maintenance continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property is created by such building, structure or system. 
(c)	Work to conform to codes. No building, structure, system, appliance or equipment, as hereinafter specified in this article, shall be constructed, erected, installed, altered or repaired, except in conformance with the provisions of this article and this Code. 
(d)	Public utility services. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of services up to and including the meters where such work is performed by or is an integral part of a system owned or operated by a public utility service corporation, water department, gas company, railroad company, pipeline company, or other public utility in the exercise of its normal functions or in rendering its duly authorized service as such. 
(e)	Other laws. The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(f)	Referenced codes and standards. The adopted state codes adopted pursuant to article II of this chapter shall be considered part of the requirements of this article to the prescribed extent of each such adoption. Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(g)	Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations, or repairs to any building, structure or system shall conform to that required for a new building, structure or system without requiring the existing building, structure or system to comply with all requirements of this chapter. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing building, structure or system to become unsafe, unsanitary or overloaded. 
(h)	Ordinary repairs. Ordinary repairs shall be permitted in the same manner and arrangement as in the existing system, provided that such repairs or replacements are not hazardous to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(i)	Change in occupancy. It is unlawful to make any change in the occupancy classification of any building or structure that does not meet the requirements of this chapter. If there is a change in occupancy classification, prior to the issuance of any business occupation tax certificate, the finance director or designee shall advise the building official, fire marshal, or designee that an application for a business occupation tax certificate has been submitted to the city for review and the building official, fire marshal, or designee shall ascertain whether such building or structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupancy classification and that such change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(j)	Requirements not covered by Code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure or system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code shall be determined by the director or their designee. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-27, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-60. Enforcement officials.
(a)	Enforcement. The community development department is responsible for administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)	Deputies and authorized representatives. In accordance with prescribed procedures of the city, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, authorized representatives, technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as authorized by law and delegated by the building official. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-28, 4-9-2013)
Sec. 7-61. Duties and powers of the building official.
(a)	Generally. The building official is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the adopted state codes. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Code and the adopted state codes and to adopt policies and procedures to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the force and effect of law and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code or in the adopted state codes. 
(b)	Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and plans; issue permits for the erection, construction, alteration, and demolition of buildings and structures and for the installation of mechanical, plumbing, gas, and electrical systems; inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued; and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(c)	Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)	Inspections. The building official shall or his designee shall perform all the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved qualified agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. 
(e)	Identification. The building official, deputy or authorized representative shall carry proper identification when inspecting buildings, structures, or premises in the performance of duties under this chapter. 
(f)	Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the building, structure, or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the building, structure, or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such building, structure, or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure, or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(g)	Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained for the period required by state law for retention of public records. 
(h)	Approved materials, equipment, appliances and devices. Materials, equipment, appliances and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
(i)	Alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment, and appliances. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any materials or to prohibit any designs, methods of construction, equipment or appliances not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any such alternatives have been approved by the building official in writing. Alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment, or appliances shall be approved in writing where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent and purpose of the provisions of this chapter, and the material or methods of work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(j)	Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the city. Such tests shall be paid for by the person seeking to rely on such alternative materials or methods. 
(k)	Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. 
(l)	Testing agency. All tests shall be performed by an agency approved by the building official. 
(m)	Test reports. The building official shall retain reports of tests for the period required for retention of public records. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-29, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-62. Stop work order.
(a)	Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this chapter being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(b)	Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. The stop work order shall be posted on the property and remain, under penalty of law, until the building official or designee authorizes its removal. 
(c)	Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to correct a violation or an unsafe condition, shall be subject to issuance of a court citation to appear in the municipal court of the city and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with this Code. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-38, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-63. Unsafe conditions.
(a)	Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe or uninhabitable, which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Structures that are deemed an unsafe condition shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary, unless the notice of an unsafe condition is appealed to the board in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 7-87. 
(b)	Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the building official or designee shall serve on the owner, agent, or person in control of the building, structure or system found to be unsafe, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the building official written acceptance or rejection of the terms of the notice. 
(c)	Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally or sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address with the return receipt requested. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or about the building or structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the building or structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner. 
(d)	Restoration. The building, structure, system or equipment determined to be unsafe by the building official is permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations, or additions are made, or a change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the building, structure, system, or equipment, such repairs, alterations or additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-40, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-64. Violations, remedies and penalties.
(a)	Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure, system or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)	Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removing, demolition, or occupancy of a building, structure, system, or equipment in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate of occupancy under the provisions of this chapter. Such notice or order shall direct the discontinuance or correction of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(c)	Penalties. Any person failing to discontinue, correct, or abate the violation of this chapter as ordered by the building official in the notice shall be subject to issuance of a court citation to appear in the municipal court of the city to answer charges of violations of this chapter and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-37, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Secs. 7-65—7-86. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. VARIANCES AND APPEALS
Sec. 7-87. Application procedures; decision-making powers.
(a)	Applicability. All requests for relief from strict compliance with the regulations of this chapter require review and approval by the board of appeals in accordance with the variance procedures of chapter 27, zoning. 
(b)	Powers and duties. The board shall have the following powers: 
(1)	To hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official; 
(2)	To hear appeals of the building official's decision related to the use of alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment, and appliances pursuant to section 7-119(m); 
(3)	To hear appeals of the building official's decision related to unsafe conditions as regulated in section 7-63; 
(4)	To hear and grant variances from the provisions of division 3 of this article; 
(5)	To hear and grant applications for pre-qualification of alternate-registered engineers as referenced in section 7-170(i) as well as remove pre-qualification status from alternate registered engineers as the board deems appropriate in its sole discretion; and 
(6)	To review proposed amendments to the land development and technical codes and to provide recommendations on such amendments to the governing authority. 
(c)	Application forms; filing of applications; application fees. Applications for appeals, variances, and alternate-registered engineers shall be filed on forms provided by the city and shall not be considered authorized or accepted unless complete in all respects, including the payment of any application fees. Application fees shall be established by the city council. 
(d)	Appeals of the building official's decisions.
(1)	Notice of appeal of a building official decision to the board shall be in writing and filed with the director within 30 calendar days after the building official's decision is rendered. Appeals shall be on a form provided by the director. 
(2)	An appeal shall be sustained only upon an express written finding by the board that the building official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact or that the building official acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit, provided all requirements imposed by all applicable laws are met. The board may also remand any appeal for the receipt of additional information. 
(3)	In the case of a building, structure, or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, constitutes an unsafe condition as that term is used in section 7-63, the building official may, in the decision or order, limit the time for the filing of such appeals to not less than two days and the director may request expedited review by the board of the appeal. 
(4)	If the building official's decisions results in a revocation or denial of the issuance of any permit or certificate authorized by this chapter, the affected applicant or permittee may request, and shall be allowed, to meet with the director within two business days after the initial issuance of such order or decision. At such meeting the affected applicant or permittee shall be allowed to present any evidence or testimony to the director that the applicant deems appropriate. If such a meeting is not requested or the director does not alter the decision to revoke or deny the issuance of any permit or certificate, then the building official's decision becomes final. During the pendency of any subsequent appeal to the board, the notice of appeal shall not stay enforcement of the director's decision and the applicant or permittee may not take any action, perform any act or occupy any structure that contradicts the director's revocation or denial decision in this regard. 
(e)	Variances.
(1)	The owner of a building, structure, or service system, or duly authorized representative, may file a request to the board to vary any provision of the technical codes in accordance with the provisions of this section on forms promulgated by the city or the director. 
(2)	In granting a variance, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(3)	No variance may be granted unless such variance can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of this chapter. No variance shall be granted by the board to: 
a.	Allow any variance which conflicts with or changes any requirement established as a condition by the city council; 
b.	Reduce, waive, or modify in any manner any minimum standards set forth in the adopted codes generally identified in section 7-23, as amended; and 
c.	Reduce, waive, or modify any environmental protection measures such as tree protection and/or soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(4)	The board shall grant variances from the provisions or requirements of this chapter only upon making written findings of the following: 
a.	The strict application of the requirements of this chapter would deprive the building, structure, or service system owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other building, structure, or service system owners within the city; 
b.	The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other building, structure, or service system property owners within the city; 
c.	The grant of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or any improvements; 
d.	The liberal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of this chapter would cause undue and unnecessary hardship; 
e.	The method or material requested is at least as protective as the method or materials required by this chapter; and 
f.	The applicant has supplied the city with an independent study or analysis by a registered design professional that shows that the method or material meets or exceeds the methods or materials required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-16, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2013-05-05, §1(7-16(a)), 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 2014-05-03, § 1, 5-13-2014; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-05-06, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2019-05-06, § I(Attch.), adopted May 28, 2019, amended § 7-87 and in doing so changed the title of said section from "Membership; variances, terms of office; decision-making powers" to "Application procedures; decision-making powers," as set out herein. 
Secs. 7-88—7-117. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. PERMITS, PLANS AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
Sec. 7-118. Permits.
(a)	Building permit required. A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, erection, alteration or repair to a building or structure, mechanical system, gas system, plumbing system, electrical system, and energy conservation system, other than ordinary repairs. Permits shall be obtained before beginning work. Permits for emergency work shall be obtained within 24 hours after work is commenced. 
(b)	Exception to permit required. Ordinary repairs to a single-family residential building or structure shall not be required to obtain a permit. 
(c)	Work commencing before permit issuance. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, any person, contractor, or company commencing any work on a building or structure, mechanical, gas, plumbing, or system electrical system before obtaining the required permit shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee. 
(d)	Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from the permit requirements of this section shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of the city. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)	Building.
a.	Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids. 
b.	Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one. 
c.	Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, cabinetry, or counter tops, if plumbing is not affected, millwork, and similar finish work. 
d.	Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and scenery. 
e.	Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep and are installed entirely above ground. 
f.	Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings. 
g.	Window awnings supported by an exterior wall. 
h.	Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1753 mm) in height. 
i.	Detached accessory structures of 100 square feet or less. 
(2)	Electrical.
a.	Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
b.	Radio and television transmitting stations. Electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions. Permits are required for equipment and wiring for power supply, and the installation of towers and antennas. 
c.	Temporary testing systems. The installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
(3)	Gas.
a.	Portable heating appliances. 
b.	Replacement of any minor component of equipment that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(4)	Mechanical.
a.	Portable heating appliances. 
b.	Portable ventilation equipment. 
c.	Portable cooling unit. 
d.	Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this chapter. 
e.	Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. 
f.	Portable evaporative cooler. 
g.	Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(5)	Plumbing.
a.	The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this chapter. 
b.	The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipe, valves, or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
c.	Removal and replacement of sinks, lavatories, faucets, and water closets without relocations of fixtures or piping. 
(e)	Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a permit application on a form furnished by the community development department for that purpose. Such application shall: 
(1)	Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
(2)	Describe the property on which the proposed work is to be done by street address, including suite or unit number, zip code, and tax parcel ID, to identify and definitely locate the proposed building or structure or work. 
(3)	Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
(4)	Be accompanied by construction plans and documents and any other information that the building official may require to ascertain whether the proposed building meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)	State the cost of labor and materials for the proposed work. 
(6)	Provide the legal name of the property owner. 
(7)	Provide the company name, state license-holder's name and license(s) number, address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant/contractor and shall be signed by the applicant/contractor or the authorized permit agent. Legible copies of current state licenses, business licenses, and state-issued photo identification, and if applicable, notarized permit agent forms or homeowner affidavits, must be submitted prior to issuance of permits. 
(8)	The building official may require any additional information to be provided so that an understanding of all work to be performed can be ascertained from the permit application. 
(f)	Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing but no later than 60 calendar days after the filing of a complete application in conformity with this section. If the application or the construction plans or documents do not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and that required approval from city departments and outside agencies have been verified, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(g)	Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless a permit has been issued. The building official is authorized to grant up to three written extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each before such application is declared abandoned. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(h)	Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any provisions of this chapter, of any local, state or federal law or any provision of this Code. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of this Code shall not be valid and are void. The issuance of a permit based on construction plans and documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction plans and documents and other data. The building official is authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a building or structure where there exists any violation of this chapter or of any other provisions of the Code or of conditions of approval of permit, or where there exists a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public or the occupants of the building or structure. 
(i)	Expiration of permit. Every permit issued shall become invalid and of no force and effect unless the work on the site authorized by such permit has not commenced and passed a city inspection within 180 days of issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit has been commenced and has been suspended or abandoned with no further city inspection passed for a period of 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant three written extension of the permit for a period of not more than 90 days. The director of community development is authorized to grant one 90-day written extension. The extension(s) shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. All additional extension requests shall be heard by city council. Extension requests shall be submitted in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated at least 30 days prior to the permit expiration date. The extension request will be placed on the next available city council agenda. 
(j)	Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter if the permit is issued in error or based on incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete information, or in violation of any applicable provision of this Code. 
(k)	Contractor change; reissuing of permit.
(1)	No permit shall be reissued on any work or job site for which a permit already exists except after notification in writing from the owner of the change in contractor and that the new contractor is authorized by the owner to re-permit the work. Re-issuance of a permit shall make the new contractor responsible for the complete job or system and all work or code deficiencies, if any, as built, erected or installed by the previous or former contractor. 
(2)	The contractor who re-permits the work or job shall pay a change of contractor fee in the amount established by action of the city council. 
(l)	Placement of building permit, and construction plans. The building permit or copy, and approved construction and site plans shall be kept on the site of the work until completion of the work. The building permit or copy shall be posted within 36 to 48 inches above grade facing the street or in a window of the structure under construction in a manner where it is visible from the street and if outside, in a weatherproof cover. The construction plans shall be kept on the construction site in a manner that they can be produced upon demand by the building official. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-30, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-11-04, § I(Attch.), 11-26-2019; Ord. No. 2023-05-02, § I, 5-9-2023)
Sec. 7-119. Construction plans and documents.
(a)	Submittal of plans and documents.
(1)	Construction plans and documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction plans and documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional. When the building official is unable to make a determination as to the granting or denial of a permit based upon the plans submitted with a permit application, the building official is authorized to require additional construction plans and documents to be prepared by the applicant or a registered design professional. 
(2)	The building official is authorized to waive in writing the requirement for construction plans if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction plans and documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter. In addition, construction plans and documents for single-family residential construction do not have to be prepared by a registered design professional unless required by the building official in writing. 
(b)	Information on construction plans and documents. Construction plans and documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic submittal of construction plans and documents may be required by the building official. Construction plans and documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(c)	Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection systems shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this chapter and the construction plans and documents and shall be approved by the building official prior to the start of system installation. 
(d)	Manufacturer's installation instructions for. Manufacturer's installation instructions, as required by the International Codes, shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection. 
(e)	Exterior wall envelope. Construction plans and documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this chapter. The construction plans and documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves, or parapets, means of drainage, water resistive membrane, and details around openings. 
(f)	Manufacturing installation instructions. The construction plans and documents shall include manufacturing installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction plans and documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system that was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used. 
(g)	Site plan. The construction plans and documents submitted with the application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a site plan for review by the community development department. The building official is authorized to waive or modify in writing the requirement for a site plan. 
The site plan shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey and must be signed and sealed by a registered land surveyor. If trees are to be removed or the critical root zones of trees impacted by construction, the site plan must be signed and sealed by a certified arborist, and a tree survey and tree protection plan must be submitted. Site plans must show to scale: 
(1)	The size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site and distances from lot lines; 
(2)	The established street grades and the proposed finished grades for the entire site, the storm water control measures to protect adjacent properties, erosion control, and water quality measures; 
(3)	Impervious surface calculations; and 
(4)	The location of the following construction-related items: dumpsters or other onsite disposal equipment, portable toilets, onsite parking for construction vehicles, construction material staging and storage, and borrow or stockpile areas. 
In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show the construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or lot. 
(h)	Examination of construction plans and documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction plans and documents and shall ascertain by such examination whether the proposed construction indicated and described is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent provisions of this Code. 
(i)	Approval of construction plans and documents. When a permit is issued, the construction plans and documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as being in compliance with this chapter. However, the approval of construction plans and documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction plans and documents and other data. The applicant shall keep an approved set of plans at the site of work which shall be open to inspection by the building official. 
(j)	Previous approvals. The enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall not require changes in the construction plans and documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been issued prior to enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived and the construction of which has been pursued and not abandoned within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(k)	Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction plans and documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that construction plans and documents, adequate information, and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this chapter. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the approved part of the building construction operation and without any assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted in the future. 
(l)	Design professional in responsible charge.
(1)	When it is required and requested by the building official that construction plans and documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The owner shall notify the building official in writing if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties required by this Code. 
(2)	The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal plans and documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. 
(m)	Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. 
(1)	Deferral of any submittal items shall require prior approval by the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction plans and documents for review by the building official. 
(2)	Submittal construction plans and documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that they have been found to be in general conformance with the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until their design and submittal plans and documents have been approved by the building official in writing. 
(n)	Amended construction plans and documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the reviewed construction plans and documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction plans and documents shall be resubmitted by the holder of the building permit for approval as an amended set of construction plans and documents. 
(o)	Retention of construction plans and documents. One set of approved construction plans and documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work or as required by state or local laws. 
(p)	Compliance with conditions. All permits shall be in compliance with all of the terms and conditions of all applicable zoning, special land use permit, variance, and special exception cases. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-31, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-120. Permit fees; revocation.
(a)	Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by the city council have been paid. No amendment to a permit shall be released to the applicant until the additional permit fee, if any, has been paid. 
(b)	Schedule of permit fees. Permit fees for buildings, structures, mechanical, gas, plumbing, electrical, and fire systems shall be determined by the city council. The schedule of fees approved by the city council shall be maintained by the city clerk and the director shall also retain a copy available for public inspection. 
(c)	Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(d)	Refunds. The city council is authorized to adopt a written refund policy that applies to the refund of permit fees authorized by this chapter. 
(e)	Revocation of certificates. A certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be suspended or revoked by the director, and considered void, if: 
(1)	The permit application contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)	Changes or alterations in the type of permitted use or occupancy occur without approval required by this Code; 
(3)	Changes or violations of the conditions of the certificate occur without approval required by this Code; 
(4)	Alterations, additions or improvements to the building, structure or systems occur without approval or without obtaining all necessary permits required by this Code; 
(5)	The premises covered by the certificate are found to be in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, or of state or federal law or codes; 
(6)	The establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety, or welfare. 
(f)	No certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter to any applicant, business, or legally or organizationally related entity if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this chapter the same applicant, business, or legally or organizationally related entity requesting a certificate has been denied a certificate or had a certificate revoked for any location based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material facts in any application. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-33, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-121. Demolition permits.
(a)	A demolition site plan shall be submitted as part of the permit application package. The demolition site plan shall depict the trees, structures, and impervious surfaces to be removed; location and size of all trees greater than six inches DBH; construction exits; tree-save areas; and best management practices for erosion control. Additionally, no demolition permit for a single-family detached residence shall be issued in a residential zoning district unless the applicant includes the original threshold elevation, if any, measured and certified by a licensed surveyor or engineer. 
(b)	Only dead, diseased, or hazardous trees, as determined by a certified arborist, may be removed pursuant to a demolition permit. 
(c)	An excavation site plan shall be submitted as part of the demolition permit application package when the purpose of the excavation is to locate current sewer lines in conjunction with an application for a variance from the front-door threshold elevation pursuant to this Code. The excavation site plan shall depict the boundaries of areas to be excavated, locations of storage areas for excavated materials, the location of structures and impervious surfaces, the location and size of all trees greater than six inches DBH in the footprint of the planned excavation, tree-save areas and best management practices for erosion control. 
(d)	Applications for demolition permits require the signature of the property owner of record or owner's authorized representative. 
(e)	Applications for structural demolition require submittal of a copy of the Georgia EPD Project Notification, if testing found no asbestos, or of the Georgia EPD Completion Notification, if asbestos was present and remediated. 
(f)	A letter from a pest control company must be submitted with an application for a demolition permit, certifying that the property has been inspected within 30 days of the date of application for a demolition permit, and treated if evidence of infestation was found. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-31.2, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-122. Temporary structures and uses.
(a)	Generally. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than one year. The building official is authorized to grant one written extension of one year. The request for extension shall be in writing and shall specify the justifiable cause. 
(b)	Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this chapter as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)	Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion or occupancy has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the National Electrical Code, as adopted in article II of this chapter. 
(d)	Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued for violation of the Code or applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-32, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Secs. 7-123—7-142. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Sec. 7-143. Certificates of occupancy.
(a)	Required. No building or structure or portion thereof shall be occupied or a change made in the type of occupancy or the nature of the use of an existing building or part thereof until after an appropriate certificate as required by this section has been issued. 
(b)	Certificate of occupancy.
(1)	Issuance. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the building official until the building, structure, and intended use comply with all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance, all construction is complete, and all required final building, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electric, fire, health, vegetation protection, and site drainage inspections have been performed and approved. 
(2)	Scope. The certificate of occupancy certifies that all final inspections have been completed and the structure has been erected, to the best of the inspector's knowledge, in compliance with applicable Code requirements at the time of the issuance of the certificate. However, issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not excuse the builder, contractor, tenant, or property owner from liability for any violation of the Code or any other applicable laws. Occupancy shall be limited to the area or portion of a building or structure defined by the building permit for which the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(c)	Temporary certificate of occupancy.
(1)	Scope. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for buildings or portions thereof for a specified period of time when it has been determined by the building official or designee that no outstanding Code violations or deficiencies exist and the building may be safely occupied for the use and time requested. A request for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be made on such form as prescribed by the building official. 
(2)	Issuance. A temporary certificate of occupancy for a part of a building or premises may be issued in accordance with the requirements of section 7-120, and the community development department director and/or his designee may impose such additional conditions and safeguards as are necessary in the circumstances of the case to protect the safety of the occupants and of the public. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for stated purposes only when construction has not been fully completed and all final inspections have not been performed. 
(3)	Revocation. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be revoked at the option of the building official for any of the following reasons: 
a.	Violation of any building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety, or site development codes or regulations. 
b.	Failure to complete any stage of construction and/or site improvements required by the building official in a timely manner. 
c.	Unauthorized occupancy or use of any part or portion of the building or structure other than the area or portion for which a temporary certificate of occupancy has been granted. 
d.	Any other conditions that may affect the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property. 
(d)	Certificate of completion. A certificate of completion may be issued upon satisfactory completion of work for which a permit was issued, when a certificate of occupancy is not required. The certificate of completion does not grant authority to occupy a building or structure or change the type of occupancy or nature of use prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(e)	Contents of certificates. Certificates shall contain the following: 
(1)	The building permit number (or in the case of a certificate of completion, the appropriate permit number). 
(2)	The address of the structure or work. 
(3)	The name and address of the owner. 
(4)	A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
(5)	A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(6)	The name of the building official. 
(7)	The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
(8)	The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of the International Building Code. 
(9)	The type of construction as defined in chapter 6 of the International Building Code. 
(10)	If nonresidential, the design occupant load. 
(11)	If an automatic sprinkler is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required. 
(12)	Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
(f)	Revocation of certificates. The building official or designee may revoke certificates of occupancy, certificates of completion issued under provisions of this chapter, where it is shown that there have been either one or more of the following: 
(1)	Changes or alterations in construction, type of permitted use, or occupancy without written approval by the building official or designee. 
(2)	Changes or violations of the conditions of the certificate without written approval by the building official or designee. 
(3)	Alterations, additions, or improvements to the building, structure, or systems without permits and inspections required by this chapter. 
(4)	Violation of any zoning, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety, or site development codes or regulations. 
(5)	Any condition that may affect the building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the director, renders the building, structure or service system unsafe, dangerous, or uninhabitable. 
(6)	After a certificate has been revoked, a valid certificate shall not be issued until all violations, changes, alterations, additions, or improvements meet all requirements of this chapter as determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-35, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, adopted Aug. 22, 2017, amended § 7-143 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Certificate of occupancy, tenancy" to "Certificate of occupancy," as set out herein. 
Secs. 7-144—7-169. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. INSPECTIONS
Sec. 7-170. Construction or work; approval and accessibility.
(a)	Generally. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official, and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other applicable provisions of the Code. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or of other provisions of the Code shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the city shall be liable for any expense entailed in the removal of any material required to allow inspection. 
(b)	Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
(c)	Inspections are performed by the building official or the building official's designee. The building official is authorized to allow inspections by qualified third-party inspectors. Such inspections shall not be performed without prior written approval of the building official. 
(d)	The building official may designate certain inspections to be performed as a combination inspection in accordance with established policies. For combination inspections, all affected trades must be ready for inspection prior to requesting the inspection. 
(e)	In addition to inspections required in this section, permits for new construction and demolition will require pre-construction and final site inspections by the city land development inspector per chapter 14. 
(f)	Required inspections. The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth as follows: 
(1)	Building.
a.	Foundation and slab inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated, forms are erected, and reinforcement is installed but before concrete is put in place. The appropriate silt and erosion control measures must be in place and functional. 
b.	Foundation survey. For new single family residences, a foundation survey by a registered land surveyor is to be made after the forms are in place and submitted for approval. The foundation survey shall be approved prior to the pouring of concrete. 
c.	Waterproofing inspection. To be made prior to backfill of crawl space or basement foundation walls. 
d.	Pre-cladding/sheathing inspection. To be made after the roof and the wall bracing, are installed and prior to placement of exterior cladding. Rough inspections on trades need not be complete for pre-cladding inspection. 
e.	Roof felt and sheathing inspection. To be performed after roof felt is installed and prior to covering exterior wall sheathing with felt paper, house wrap, or siding. 
f.	Framing (rough) inspection. To be made after wiring, piping, chimneys, duct and vents to be concealed are in place and all fire blocking is in place. This inspection occurs before any insulation or wall coverings are installed. 
g.	Final inspection. To be made after the building or structure is completed in compliance with this Code and prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(2)	Electrical.
a.	Underground and slab inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, conduit or cable are installed, and before any backfill or concrete is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking, bracing, and wiring are in place and prior to the installation of insulation and wall and ceiling membranes. 
c.	Final inspection. To be made after the building or structure is complete; all required electrical outlets, switches, and fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected; and the building or structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)	Plumbing.
a.	Underground and slab inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, and piping installed, and before any backfill or concrete is put in place. The appropriate silt and erosion control measures must be in place and functional. 
b.	Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all water, soil, waste, and vent piping is complete and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes. 
c.	Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, and all plumbing fixtures and appliances are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
d.	Testing. Plumbing work and systems shall be tested as required in section 312 of the International Plumbing Code. Tests shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the building official. 
(4)	Mechanical.
a.	Underground and slab inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, underground duct and fuel piping is installed, and before any backfill and concrete is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all duct and fuel piping to be concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes. 
c.	No mechanical equipment or ductwork is allowed to be installed in any building that is not adequately sealed from the weather. Any ductwork or equipment contaminated by stormwater must be replaced to prevent a potential mold issue or health hazard, as recommended by the DCA Mold Task Force. 
d.	Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system and appliances are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)	Gas.
a.	Rough-in inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such piping has been covered and concealed or any fixtures or appliances have been connected. 
b.	Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed, after all portions which are to be covered or concealed by wall and ceiling membranes, plastering, stone or brickwork have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. Log lighters shall be permitted separately and inspected. 
c.	Testing. This inspection shall include a gas pressure test. 
d.	Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by the new work or any changes, to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)	Energy.
a.	Insulation inspection. To be made after all rough inspections are complete and approved and before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of the exterior insulation envelope and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
b.	Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. Verification of compliance with all state amendments for the energy code in regards to sealing and compliance certificates where applicable and properly posted. 
(g)	Residential floodplain inspections. For construction permitted in areas prone to flooding as established by table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Building Code, upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building official shall require submission of a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, prepared by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor, as required in section R327 of the International Residential Building Code. 
(h)	Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 
(i)	Other inspections. In addition to any other inspections, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of the code that are enforced by the city. 
(j)	Residential fire-resistance-rated construction inspections. Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to the location on the property, the building official shall require an inspection of such construction after all lathing and/or wallboard is in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
(k)	The building official may designate required inspections for demolitions or for structures other than new buildings, alterations, or additions, such as pools, monument signs, cell towers, retaining walls, and other structures. 
(l)	Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to request and accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements of this division. 
(m)	Special inspections. When special inspections are required by chapter 17 of the International Building Code, reports shall be submitted to the building official according to the approved schedule. All reports shall be reviewed and accepted by the building official prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(n)	Inspections requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide safe access to and a safe means for inspection of such work for any inspections that are required by this chapter. 
(o)	Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this Code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
(p)	Re-inspection fees. Re-inspection fees shall be required in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the city council when work performed is required to be re-inspected due to the following reasons: 
(1)	The re-inspection is not approved due to a failure to correct a code violation noted on a prior inspection; 
(2)	The job is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested; 
(3)	The building or structure is not accessible, and inspection cannot be performed; 
(4)	Work to be inspected has been covered or concealed, and proper inspection cannot be performed; or 
(5)	Prior issuance of a stop work order requires re-inspection. 
(q)	Right-of-entry. Inspections required under the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the building official or designee. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official or designee may enter the premises between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to perform any duty imposed by this chapter, provided that the building official or designee has consent to enter the premises or has obtained and presents an inspection warrant as described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-34, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-171. Inspection warrants.
(a)	The building official, in addition to other procedures provided by law, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section. The warrant shall authorize the building official to conduct a search or inspection of property without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section. 
(b)	Inspection warrants may be issued by any judge of the municipal court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all the following conditions are met: 
(1)	The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property, or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property; 
(2)	The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this division and all other applicable law; 
(3)	The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant; 
(4)	The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes a search or inspection; 
(5)	The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the search or inspection is intended to check or reveal; and 
(6)	The warrant refers, in general terms, to the provisions of the Code or state law sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-39, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Secs. 7-172—7-195. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS REGARDING CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 7-196. Requirements for construction.
(a)	Construction activity and deliveries shall be limited to: 


There shall be no construction activity or deliveries on Sundays, New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, Memorial Day, July 4th or Labor Day unless such activity arises from an emergency which puts the site or neighboring property owners and their property at risk of harm or loss. 
(b)	Dumpsters or any onsite waste disposal equipment may not be located on the street. If adequate traffic controls can be implemented, the director or designee may approve the placement of dumpsters and onsite waste disposal equipment on a street so long as the street has a paved width greater than 24 feet. 
(c)	Portable toilets shall be located out of the right-of-way and at least 15 feet from any side property line. 
(d)	Wherever possible, temporary parking shall be provided onsite and not on the street. 
(e)	The applicant for construction on any lot shall be responsible for ensuring that all existing sewer services and taps from the buildings to the street are in operating condition prior to connection. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-31.1, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 7-197. Utility service connections.
(a)	Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, or from a source of energy, fuel, or power, to any building or system that is regulated by this chapter for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official. 
(b)	Permanent electrical service connection. Permanent electrical service connection and meter shall not be authorized until all required final building, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electrical, drainage, vegetation, fire and health inspections have been performed and approved by the appropriate city or state department or official, as applicable. 
(c)	Permanent gas service connection. Permanent gas service connection and meter shall not be authorized until the gas supply house line has been tested, inspected and approved and all appliance and equipment connections have been inspected and approved. 
(d)	Temporary electrical and gas service connections. Temporary electrical service, gas service and meter connections may be authorized for a specified period of time when the system has been inspected and found to be safe for the connections and use authorized. Such temporary service connections shall be authorized only for the following reasons: 
(1)	Testing of appliances and equipment. 
(2)	To provide heat during the winter months to prevent freeze damage to water systems and equipment and including, but not limited to, installation of wallpaper or painting. 
(3)	Temporary occupancy of the building or structure only for the training of employees or stocking of merchandise. 
(4)	Single-tenant occupancy buildings and multi-tenant occupancy buildings for which temporary service connections have been authorized shall not be allowed access by the public for business activity other than those allowed in subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section. 
(5)	Application for temporary service connections and meters shall be made on such forms as prescribed by the director. 
(e)	Authority to disconnect utility services. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by this chapter in case of an emergency, where necessary, to eliminate an immediate danger to life or property. Where possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified of the decision to disconnect utility service prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(f)	Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make connections from any energy, fuel, or power supply or from any water distribution system or supply energy, fuel or water to any equipment regulated by this chapter that has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment. 
(Ord. No. O2013-03-11, § 7-36, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, 8-22-2017)
Chapter 12 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment building means buildings containing three or more living units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities, whether designated as an apartment house, tenement, garden apartment, or by any other name. 
Battery backup means any emergency power supply for power-assisted gates operated by electrical power. 
Breakaway security gate means any gate designed to fall away under pressure. 
Case hardened metal means a steel alloy formed by diffusing carbon or nitrogen into the outer layer of the steel at high temperature such that the metal cannot be cut with a saw, and will not shatter. 
Combustible means any material that is capable of supporting ignition or the process of burning under heat exposure. 
Delayed response means any postponement of an emergency vehicle gaining access through security barriers. 
Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any hazardous substances or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that such substances or waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water, including groundwater. 
Dormitory means buildings or spaces in buildings where group sleeping accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same family group in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy and single management, as in college dormitories or other housing for students, fraternity houses, military barracks; with or without meals, but without individual cooking facilities. 
Emergency shutoff button means a device used to release hydraulic pressure on power-assisted gates operated by hydraulic power. 
Fire apparatus means any vehicle or equipment used by fire and rescue services. 
Fire marshal means a qualified officer who will perform fire marshal services for the city. 
Gamewell lock box means a box, sometimes called an elevator lock box, which must be opened with a special key carried on fire response vehicles. 
Gravity gate means a gate with no power assistance and which operates freely under manual manipulation. 
Hazardous explosive chemicals means all picric acids, nitro-based chemicals, ethers, peroxides, oxidizers, and such other chemicals as may be determined by the fire marshal to be hazardous explosives. 
Hazardous substance means a substance that satisfies any one of the following requirements: 
(1)	A substance which, because of the toxic or hazardous properties which it exhibits, is determined by the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to represent a significant risk to the public health and safety as a result of foreseeable use, handling, accidental spill, exposure or contamination; 
(2)	A substance that is known to present a significant risk of personal injury or illness as the foreseeable result of use, handling, accidental spills, exposure or contamination; or 
(3)	A substance or material that has been determined to pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal regulation in force and effective February 1, 1986, codified as 40 CFR 261—Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste, as amended. 
Hazardous waste generation means the act or process of producing hazardous waste. 
High-rise residential occupancy building means residential properties, hotels, dormitories, apartments, lodging or room houses, or board and care facilities over 75 feet or 23 meters in height measured from the lowest level of fire department vehicle access to the floor of the highest occupied story. 
Hotel/motel means a building in which separate sleeping rooms are rented that provide sleeping accommodations for 15 persons or more on either a transient or permanent basis, with or without meals, whether designated as a hotel, inn, club, motel, or by any other name. 
Improper storage means storage of chemicals past the expiration date on the label or chemicals stored in any area or container not designed for storage of the particular chemical. If there is no date listed for the expiration date, the expiration date shall be 12 months past the date that the chemical was received by the person or entity storing the chemical. 
Knox Box Rapid Entry System means a key box that is authorized by section 506 of the International Fire Code and allows firefighting access for fire department purposes. Examples of structures or areas in which a key box is required include commercial and industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system or structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency; multi-family residential structures that have restricted access through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to all the living units; governmental structures and nursing care facilities; hazardous material occupancies; and occupancies where a large number of medical or fire alarms occur and entry can be delayed. 
Lodginghouse or roominghouse means a building in which separate sleeping rooms are rented which provides sleeping accommodations for 15 or fewer persons on either a transient or permanent basis, with or without meals, but without separate cooking facilities for individual occupants. 
Pad lock means any lock that is not constructed of case hardened metal. 
Power assisted gate means any gate that is operated through a power source, whether electrical, hydraulic or pneumatic. 
Residential property means buildings containing three or more living units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities, whether designated as apartment house, tenement, garden apartment, condominium or by any other name. 
Substance means any element, entity, compound, combination, or any mixture thereof, whether organic or inorganic. 
Toggle switch means a device used to operate a power-assisted gate and override the power supply to the gate. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-2), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 12-2. Scope.
(a)	The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to both public and private property, and to all structures and their occupants, except as otherwise specified herein or by other applicable law. 
(b)	The city shall have the authority to contract with any other government entity for the enforcement of this chapter and to enter into any intergovernmental agreements for the provision of fire and rescue services. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-3), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 12-3. False fire alarm.
It shall be unlawful for any person to transmit or cause to be transmitted in any manner to fire and rescue services a false report of a fire, knowing at the time there is no factual basis for believing that such a fire exists. Such a violation shall be prosecuted under applicable state law as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-27), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 12-4—12-24. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 12-25. Duties of the fire marshal.
(a)	Other than those services provided by the county, pursuant to that Intergovernmental Agreement for the Provision of Fire Rescue Services dated February 13, 2013, as amended (the "Fire IGA"), the services to be performed by the fire marshal shall include the inspections of new buildings and renovations to existing buildings for compliance with the fire code, including the following: 
(1)	Reviewing and approving plans for both new construction and renovations of existing structures; 
(2)	Final inspections for life safety for all commercial and multifamily buildings; 
(3)	Inspections for new business licenses or change of occupancy, in conduction with the building official; and 
(4)	Inspections required for setting occupancy load, in conjunction with the building official. 
(b)	The fire marshal shall possess the education, training and experience required by state law for such position. 
(c)	The fire marshal or his designee shall remit all site plans receiving an approval for life safety by the fire marshal to the county's fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-4), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-11, § 1, 6-16-2015)
Sec. 12-26. Construction plans approval.
It shall be unlawful to construct, erect or alter any building without construction documents approved by the fire marshal for fire department accessibility, fire hydrant requirements, fire code requirements, occupancy load, aboveground and underground flammable and combustible liquids tank installations and fire protection and suppression systems, including, but not limited to, sprinklers. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-6), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 12-27. Permits.
The city shall have the authority to issue permits and to collect fees for plan review, permit and inspection in connection with commercial and multifamily buildings constructed or renovated in the city in amounts set by resolution of the city council as well as for reimbursement for other review or inspection services provided in this chapter, in this Code or by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-8), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 12-28—12-57. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. REGULATIONS AND ADOPTED CODES
Sec. 12-58. Adoption of state fire safety rules.
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq. and as may hereinafter be amended, there is hereby adopted as if fully set forth herein the state minimum fire safety standards now and as may hereafter be promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. In the event the fire marshal determines that the provisions of the state minimum fire safety standards conflict with the provisions of the International Fire Code adopted in section 12-59, then the most restrictive provision as determined by the fire marshal shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-20), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 12-59. Adoption of International Fire Code.
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20 and 8-2-25 and as may hereinafter be amended, there is hereby adopted as if fully set forth herein the International Fire Code, including chapter 1, Administration. As allowed in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, the provisions of the International Fire Code are modified and amended in sections 12-60 through 12-63. In the event the fire marshal determines that the provisions of the International Fire Code conflict with the provisions of the state minimum fire safety standards adopted in section 12-58, then the most restrictive provision as determined by the fire marshal shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-21), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 12-60. Amendments to the International Fire Code.
(a)	The International Fire Code is hereby amended by omitting section 108, Board of Appeals of chapter 1, Administration and section 108 shall not be adopted by the city. 
(b)	The International Fire Code is hereby amended by adopting Appendix C—Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution and Appendix D—Fire Apparatus Access Roads. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-22), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 12-61. Spread of fire.
(a)	All combustible landscaping materials shall be placed at least 36 inches away from the edge of any building having an external skin of either combustible sheathing or combustible siding. Aluminum siding, vinyl siding, non-treated wood siding and similar materials shall be considered combustible for the purpose of this section. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit the planting of shrubs, trees and other live plant materials closer than 36 inches away from the edge of any other building. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite a fire of any type within ten feet of a combustible building, including ignition under combustible overhangs and balconies. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-23), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-11, § 2, 6-16-2015)
Sec. 12-62. Automatic fire extinguisher system required.
(a)	All new or substantially rehabilitated multifamily dwellings properties shall be fully sprinkled in accordance with the latest adopted edition of the National Fire Protection Association publications 13 (NFPA-13) or 13R (NFPA 13R). 
(b)	All high-rise residential occupancy buildings shall have an approved sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA-13. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-24), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 12-63. Security gate/barrier installation requirements other than one- and two-family dwellings.
(a)	Definitions. 
(1)	RFID means radio frequency identification and, for the purpose of this section, refers to a mode of access to open a gate in a gated community utilizing radio frequency waves to activate the gate's locking mechanism and opening the gate. 
(2)	SOS means siren operating sensor and, for the purpose of this section, refers to a sensor that triggers the opening of gated access as a result of the emergency vehicle siren. 
(3)	Emergency vehicle means any marked or unmarked law enforcement vehicle, fire truck, fire rescue staff vehicle, ambulance and/or ambulance staff vehicle and rescue units. 
(4)	Existing gated development means a gated development that has obtained construction plan approval prior to the effective date of [the ordinance from which this section derives]. 
(5)	Gated development means any residential development which may be fenced and has a secured gate located at the roadway entrance to the facility, preventing free access by the public. 
(6)	New gated development means a gated development that has obtained construction plan approval after the effective date of [the ordinance from which this section derives]. 
(b)	Installation requirements for all gates.
(1)	All gates shall have a minimum width of 20 feet to allow for fire apparatus access. 
(2)	All gates shall have signage indicating gate direction of travel. 
(3)	All objects on a gate that may obstruct the path of emergency vehicles must be covered with reflective paint, tape or lights sufficient to guide vehicles around the obstruction. 
(4)	The owner of the property shall ensure that all hydraulic gates are disabled and left in the open position when the temperature is expected to drop below 25 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(5)	If a gate is located on a turn, the turn must have a 35-foot clear inside radius and a 50-foot clear outside radius. 
(6)	Gate installers shall provide information on the operational features of the gate to the fire marshal prior to the installation of any security gate. 
(7)	The fire marshal prior to installation of any security gate must approve its operational features. 
(8)	When gates are opened for emergency access, they shall remain open until reactivated. 
(9)	Construction plans or blueprints shall be submitted to the community development department for approval by the fire marshal prior to an owner or applicant beginning work on the installation of a gate. 
(10)	Each new or existing gated development, to which access is limited by security gate(s) that are unmanned or otherwise not physically attended by a person on a 24-hour basis shall be required to install an RFID/SOS gate access system on each roadway entrance gate to allow for silent radio frequency or siren-activated access by emergency vehicles. This requirement shall apply to all such gates that are part of a gated development, whether leading outside the development or internal to the development. 
(11)	The city shall bear the cost of the RFID/SOS system for existing gated developments. Gated development approved after the effective date of this section shall bear the cost of the RFID/SOS system. Gated developments, whether existing or new, shall bear the cost of continuous maintenance of their RFID/SOS system. 
(12)	Existing gated developments shall have 12 months from the effective date of [the ordinance from which this section derives] to comply with the provisions of this section. Gated developments developed after the effective date of [the ordinance from which this section derives] shall comply with this section prior to or concurrent with installation of an unmanned security gate. 
(13)	Failure to install and continuously maintain the required RFID/SOS gate access system in conformance with the provisions of this section shall be a violation of this section. This section shall be administered by the Brookhaven Fire Marshal. 
(14)	The provisions of this section are intended to ensure a minimum level of access by emergency personnel during emergencies and shall not be construed to guarantee the safety of a gated development during an emergency. 
(c)	Installation requirement for power-assisted gates.
(1)	Property owners shall ensure that Gamewell lock boxes or any means of security approved by the fire marshal shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)	Power assisted gates shall contain a toggle switch to manually operate the gate and override the power. 
(3)	The property owner shall install in gates operated by electrical means a battery backup to keep the toggle switch operational. 
(4)	The property owner shall also ensure that the power-assisted gate is equipped to operate manually. 
(5)	Property owners shall ensure that hydraulic gates have an emergency button or knob to release pressure. The button or knob shall be located at the hydraulic arm, and one shutoff is required for each arm. If the emergency shutoff is used, the gate must be capable of being secured to prevent it from swinging back to the closed position. 
(d)	Installation requirements for gravity gate locking devices.
(1)	Pad locks may be used to secure a gate only if the pad lock is not constructed of case hardened metals. 
(2)	Gates shall be installed to allow fire apparatus to access the property and not impede the flow of traffic. This includes a sufficient distance to allow gates to open if swinging in the direction of the fire apparatus. 
(e)	Installation requirements for chain and pole security barriers.
(1)	Property owners must seek approval from the fire marshal prior to the use of chain and pole barriers. 
(2)	Chains and pole barriers must not be constructed of case hardened metal. 
(f)	Installation requirements for break away security gates.
(1)	When the security gate arm is raised, the property owner must ensure that the arm remains raised until reset for normal operation. 
(2)	The mechanism for overriding the gate shall be accessible to the employees of the fire rescue service provider. 
(3)	When in use, the gate arm should be open to an angle greater than 90 degrees to the terrain of the driveway. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-25), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2017-07-02, § I, 7-25-2017)
Sec. 12-64. Emergency responders radio coverage (ERRC) systems.
(a)	Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Radio penetration analysis means an industry standard test of both downlink and uplink radio signal strength as measured by a spectrum analyzer and portable radio of the same type and model used by the Brookhaven Public Safety staff. 
(b)	General requirements.
(1)	A radio booster system that complies with International Fire Code (IFC), Section 510, ERRC shall be required in all newly constructed buildings, unless exempted by subsections (3) or (4) below. A certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be issued where the requirements of the IFC, Section 510, ERRC are not being met. 
(2)	Should any first responder report a Delivered Audio Quality (DAQ), as defined in IFC section 510, of less than 3 on their radio communications system inside of any existing building within the City of Brookhaven, the Brookhaven Fire Marshal shall require a radio penetration analysis. If it is determined that radio coverage based on the radio penetration analysis is less than 95 percent of any floor or level of a structure or less than 99 percent of critical areas as defined in NFPA 1221-2019 section 9.6.7.2, the Brookhaven Fire Marshal shall require an ERRC system to be installed in compliance with the currently adopted IFC, Section 510.2, and Chapter 11, Fire Safety Requirements for Existing Buildings. 
(3)	A radio penetration analysis shall be conducted by a vendor approved by the Brookhaven Fire Marshal and shall meet the requirements of IFC 510.4 and shall include an analysis of the DAQ and the measured signal strength in decibels per milliwatt (dBm). A minimum of -95 dBm is required in addition to a DAQ of no less than 3.0. 
(4)	The use of Class B or broadband amplifiers to achieve required radio signal levels is prohibited without special permission of the Brookhaven Fire Marshal. 
(c)	Exemptions.
(1)	The following structures are not required to comply with the requirements of IFC Section 510: 
a.	Existing buildings that perform a radio penetration analysis and achieve radio coverage without amplification. 
b.	Existing buildings with no more than two occupiable stories. 
c.	Existing buildings with no more than 12,000 total square feet. 
d.	Existing buildings with no floors below grade. 
e.	Additions to buildings, unless the exceptions above are exceeded for the area of the addition, in which case the entire building being expanded must meet IFC 510 requirements. 
(d)	Violation and penalties.
(1)	Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section as hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith shall be subject to article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2021-04-01, § I(Attch.), 4-13-2021)
Secs. 12-65—12-84. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. INSPECTIONS, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Sec. 12-85. Responsibility for violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter, to permit or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-40), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 12-86. Penalties for violation.
(a)	Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter as hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications of plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall for each and every such violation or noncompliance, be guilty of an ordinance violation and, where applicable, state or federal law. Upon conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, the individual shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-11. 
(b)	The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor shall the violation be permitted to continue. Any person convicted of a violation under this chapter shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time as set by the sentencing judge. In the event the time period set by the judge to correct or remedy such violation expires and the violation continues, each day the violation continues will constitute a separate offense. When not otherwise specified, the application of the penalty stated in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-44), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Secs. 12-87—12-115. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. HAZARDOUS EXPLOSIVE CHEMICALS
Sec. 12-116. Improper storage prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or institution to keep hazardous explosive chemicals, which are used or stored for which the expiration date has passed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-60), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 12-117—12-145. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. OPEN BURNING
Sec. 12-146. Permitted and prohibited burning.
(a)	No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning in any area of the city except as follows: 
(1)	Open burning in a reasonable fashion for the purpose of cooking food for immediate human consumption, provided, however, except for one- and two-family dwellings, it shall be unlawful to use charcoal burners or other open flame cooking devices on combustible balconies or within ten feet of combustible construction. 
(2)	Operation of devices using open flames such as candles, lanterns, tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used. 
(3)	Open burning in other than residential areas for the purpose of land clearing or construction or right-of-way maintenance. 
(4)	Warming fires in a barrel of 55-gallon capacity or less, or other commercially sold outdoor fireplace devices, provided that: 
a.	The fire does not produce dense smoke or obnoxious odors; and 
b.	The fire is attended by an individual over the age of 17 years. 
Untreated wood or lumber shall be the only material or substance allowed in the warming fire. 
(5)	To reduce bodily injury and property damage, open flames shall be prohibited in urban campsites as defined in Section 18-36. Open flames include but are not limited to cooking and warming fires. 
(b)	Open burning allowed as set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall meet the following standards: 
(1)	Materials such as heavy oils, gasoline, asphaltic materials, plastic, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any other material producing dense smoke or obnoxious odors shall not be used for starting or maintaining an open fire. 
(2)	All burning shall be located on private property, so as not to interfere with any traffic on public streets or sidewalks. 
(3)	No burning shall be allowed in violation of restrictions imposed by the federal environmental protection agency or the state environmental protection division or other rules and regulations adopted herein, including the state minimum fire safety standards. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-61), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2023-05-01, § I, 5-9-2023)
Secs. 12-147—12-175. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. FIREWORKS
Sec. 12-176. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. In the event that any definitions used in this article conflict with those contained in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq., the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq., as amended, shall control. 
Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations (16 CFR 1500 and 1507), the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (49 CFR 172), and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. The term "consumer fireworks" shall not include: 
(1)	Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term "consumer fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(2)	Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedos, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. The term "fireworks" does not include: 
(1)	Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor does the term "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(2)	Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-51), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-11, § 3(12-51), 6-16-2015)
Sec. 12-177. Fireworks activities restricted.
Except as permitted under state law and as otherwise permitted in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, or to use or explode or cause to be exploded, or to possess, manufacture, or store any consumer fireworks or fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-52), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-11, § 3(12-52), 6-16-2015)
Sec. 12-178. Reserved.
(Ord. No. 2015-06-11, § 2(12-53), 6-16-2015; Superceded by State Law)
Sec. 12-179. Public exhibitions or displays of fireworks.
Public exhibitions or displays of fireworks shall be allowed if properly permitted according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. ch. 25-10. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-54), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-11, § 3(12-54), 6-16-2015)
Sec. 12-180. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment, and upon conviction, subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-03, § 1(12-55), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-11, § 3(12-55), 6-16-2015)
Chapter 14 LAND DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected to a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Administrator means the person appointed to administer and implement this article on post-construction stormwater management for new development and redevelopment in accordance with section 14-80. 
Aggrieved persons means persons whose property is the subject of the action appealed from or a person's who has a substantial interest in the action appealed from that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
Agricultural operations means raising, harvesting or storing of crops; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds. 
Alley means a minor way, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise fronting on a street. 
Applicant means a person submitting a land development application for approval. 
As-built drawings means amended site plans specifying the location, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of public improvements, including water, sewer, road and drainage structures and stormwater management facilities as they have been constructed. 
Bank (stream bank) means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Basement means a space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-half feet. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means these include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
BMP landscaping plan means a design for vegetation and landscaping that is critical to the performance and function of the BMP including how the BMP will be stabilized and established with vegetation. It shall include a layout of plants and plant names (local and scientific). 
Bicycle lane means that part of a street or highway adjacent to the roadway, designated by official signs or markings for use by persons riding bicycles. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the community development department may delineate the outline of the block. 
BNR means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buffer, city, means an area of land 50 feet in width immediately adjacent to the state buffer. 
Buffer, state, means an area of land 25 feet in width immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buffer, stream, means the state buffer and the city buffer as measured horizontally from the top of the stream bank. 
Buildable area means the area of a lot remaining after all setback requirements, including buffer areas, have been met. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building permit means required written permission issued by the community development department for the construction, repair, alteration, or addition to a structure. 
Building setback line means the minimum horizontal distance required between the public right-of-way or the utility easement abutting a private street and the principal building or structure on a lot or any projection thereof except projections that are authorized exceptions to building set, back line requirements in chapter 27 and any zoning conditions approved by the city council pursuant thereto. The size of the utility easements for a private street shall be equal to the required size of the public right-of-way and shall not be any smaller in width or length than what would be required for a public right-of-way. 
Caliper means the diameter of a tree trunk, applied only to new or replacement plantings, measured six inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conveys continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Channel protection means the protection of stream channels, in accordance with the state stormwater management manual, from bank and bed erosion and degradation by preserving or restoring the applicable stream buffer, by providing extended detention, and by integrating erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
Conservation easement means a restriction or limitation on the use of real property which is expressly recited in any deed or other instrument of grant or conveyance executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein and whose purpose is to preserve land or water areas predominantly in their natural scenic landscape or open condition or in an agricultural farming, forest or open space use and includes conservation easements authorized by state law. 
Construction means any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development or changed use, including particularly any preparation for, building of or erection of a structure. 
Construction sequencing plan means a document noting the sequence of construction and identification of infiltration zones for protection during staged installation of permanent post-construction BMPs to ensure suitable site conditions such as avoiding soil compaction by heavy equipment in areas designated for infiltration BMPs. 
Construction waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, asbestos-containing waste, wood, tree stumps, tree tops, bricks, metal, concrete block, wall board, paper, cardboard, glass, wire, plastics, and other typical construction waste products and refuse. 
CPESC means Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Crosswalk means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor-propelled vehicles are excluded, and which is designed to improve or provide access to adjacent roads or lots. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. The term "cut" is also known as "excavation." 
DNR means the department of natural resources of the state. 
Deck, elevated, means an open, unenclosed structure elevated above pervious natural grade that is attached to the primary structure. 
Density factor means a unit of measurement used to prescribe the calculated required tree coverage on a site. 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater detention facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a structure designed for the storage and gradual release of stormwater runoff at controlled rates. 
Development means new development or redevelopment. 
District means the DeKalb County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage means the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area, either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owners of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Drainage plan means a plan prepared using appropriate and commonly accepted engineering standards, which specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including, but not limited to, both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, detention facilities that comprise the storm drainage system. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls. 
EPD means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in section (4) c. of this section. 
Extended detention means the storage of stormwater runoff for an extended period of time. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means that all soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that exceeds the banks or walls of a BMP, or channel; and overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of a flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan (i.e., the regulatory flood). 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., the top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Frontage, lot, means the distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) means the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2: Technical Handbook, and its appendices. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Hotspot means a land use or activity on a site that has the potential to produce higher than normally found levels of pollutants in stormwater runoff. As defined by the administrator, hotspot land use may include gasoline stations, vehicle service and maintenance areas, industrial facilities (both permitted under the Industrial Stormwater General Permit and others), material storage sites, garbage transfer facilities, and commercial parking lots with high-intensity use. 
Impervious surface means a surface composed of any material including, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, parking lots, driveways, streets, roads, decks (other than elevated slatted decks), swimming pools, patio areas, paved storage areas, compacted gravel areas, artificial turf, awnings and any concrete or asphalt areas that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into the soil. 
Industrial Stormwater General Permit means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued by Georgia Environmental Protection Division to an industry for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity. The permit regulates pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies based on Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection, operation, and maintenance of the stormwater management system and its components on a site. 
Intermediate regional flood (IRF) means a 100-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard map which has a probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (Also known as the base flood, or 100-year flood.) 
Intermediate regional floodplain means the land area within the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year as defined on the flood hazard map. (Also known as area of special flood hazard, or 100-year floodplain.) 
Land development application means the application for a land development permit on a form provided by the City of Brookhaven along with the supporting documentation required in section 14-86(1). 
Land development permit means the authorization necessary to begin construction-related, land-disturbing activity 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, and filling of land. Land disturbing activity does not include agricultural practices as described O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(5) or silvicultural land management activities as described O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(6) within areas zoned for these activities. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, "plan" means an announcement, piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design, or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Linear feasibility program means a feasibility program developed by the City of Brookhaven and submitted to the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, which sets reasonable criteria for determining when implementation of stormwater management standards for linear transportation projects being constructed by the City of Brookhaven is infeasible. 
Linear transportation projects means construction projects on traveled ways including, but not limited to, roads, sidewalks, multi-use paths and trails, and airport runways and taxiways. 
Live detention means that quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a designated facility for stormwater storage for a specified period of time. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Local street means a street used primarily for access to abutting properties in residential, industrial or other developments. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
Manufactured home means a new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition, except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC section 5401 et seq. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain Metropolitan River corridors and their drainage basins. 
Minor site work permit means a development permit for minor activities including, but not limited to, increases in impervious area, replacement of paving/concrete, paving system installation, driveway expansion, landscaping, retaining walls less than four feet in height, land disturbance less than 5,000 square feet, and drainage improvements as determined by the director of community development or his designee. 
Multi-use trail means a recreation corridor intended for the use of non-motorized forms of transportation such as, but not limited to, walking, running, bicycles, in-line skates, as identified in a master plan for multi-use trails in city approved by the city council. 
MS4 permit means the NPDES permit issued by Georgia Environmental Protection Division for discharges from the City of Brookhaven's municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
New development means land disturbing activities, structural development (construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure), and/or creation of impervious surfaces on a previously undeveloped site. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a wastewater treatment facility or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water or groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
100-year floodplain means land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Open space means that portion of a lot, including yards, established pursuant to the requirements of this chapter as open space, which is open and unobstructed from ground level to the sky, with the exception of natural foliage or accessory recreational facilities or walkways, which is accessible to all persons occupying a building on the lot and is not a part of the roof of any portion of any building. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)	Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)	Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain). 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this section. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Post-construction stormwater management means stormwater best management practices that are used on a permanent basis to control and treat runoff once construction has been completed in accordance with a stormwater management plan. 
Post-development means the conditions anticipated to exist on site immediately after completion of the proposed development. 
Practicability policy means the latest edition of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District's Policy on Practicability Analysis for Runoff Reduction. 
Pre-development means the conditions that exist on a site immediately before the implementation of the proposed development. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time before the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Pre-development hydrology means the runoff curve number determined using natural conditions hydrologic analysis based on the natural, undisturbed condition of the site. 
Previously developed site means a site that has been altered by paving, construction, and/or land disturbing activity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia Manual" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Public facilities means the roads, water, sewer, schools, traffic control devices, and electrical service of the city. 
Public works director means the director of the public works department or designee. 
Reasonable access means a 15-foot access easement from the public right-of-way to the stormwater management facility and a ten-foot drainage and maintenance easement on all four sides of the stormwater management facility. 
Recreation areas means those portions of open space designed and intended for active recreational use, such as sports fields and other play areas. 
Redevelopment means structural development (construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other structure), creation or addition of impervious surfaces, replacement of impervious surfaces not as part of routine maintenance, and land disturbing activities associated with structural or impervious development on a previously developed site. Redevelopment does not include such activities as exterior remodeling. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Residential shall have the same meaning as given in chapter 27, except that it shall not include apartments. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Rock outcropping means a single, contiguous piece of exposed rock that has a horizontal surface area equal to or greater than 200 square feet. 
Routine maintenance means activities to keep an impervious surface as near as possible to its constructed condition. This includes ordinary maintenance activities, resurfacing paved areas, and exterior building changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Sediment basin means a detention facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process that may be constructed as part of or separately from a detention facility. 
Site means an area of land where development is planned, which may include all or portions of one or more parcels of land. For subdivisions and other common plans of development, the site includes all areas of land covered under an applicable land development permit. 
Site plan means that plan required to acquire a development, construction or building permit which shows the means by which the applicant will conform to applicable provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
SS&WCC means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC § 1251 et seq. and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approach and technique that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater concept plan means an initial plan for post-construction stormwater management at the site that provides the groundwork for the stormwater management plan including the natural resources inventory, site layout concept, initial runoff characterization, and first round stormwater management system design. 
Stormwater management manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Stormwater management plan means a plan for post-construction stormwater management at the site that meets the requirements of section 14-84(d) and is included as part of the land development application. 
Stormwater management standards means those standards set forth in section 14-83. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of non-structural site design features and structural BMPs for collection, conveyance, storage, infiltration, treatment, and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner designed to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
Stream means state waters, and natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground, and includes, but is not limited to, all natural or manmade streams depicted on the 1995 city Geographic Information System (GIS) map maintained by the city GIS director. Stream starts at the location of a spring, seep or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow. No stream shall be excluded from this definition due to its failure to be identified on the GIS map. Field verification shall be performed to make a final determination as to the existence of a stream where a dispute exists. Such field verification may be performed by the director. 
Streambank means as measured horizontally from that point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action. 
Street, private, means an access way similar to and having the same function as a public street, providing access to more than one property but held in private ownership. Private streets, when authorized, shall be developed in accordance with the specifications for public streets established in article VII, division 3, subdivision II of this chapter. 
Street right-of-way means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a street right-of-way. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. The term "structure" does not include telephone poles and utility boxes. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are rip rap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
SWCD means the soil and water conservation district within which the city is located. 
Tree harvesting means the felling, loading, and transporting of timber products done pursuant to a special exception issued by the board of appeals. 
Tree replacement means the replacement of trees and landscape plant materials into the minimum required landscape areas, as determined by the zoning regulations or the tree protection ordinance. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 
Trout waters, first order, means streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Trout waters, primary, means streams or waters supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. 
Trout waters, secondary, means streams or waters in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. 
Used for includes the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for." 
Vegetation means all plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses and grasses. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by: covering the soil with permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Water quality protection means the requirement that all developments must improve the quality of storm runoff from the development site. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term "wetlands" generally includes swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-04, § 1(14-1), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2017-08-07, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05-04, § I, 5-22-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020; Ord. No. 2021-07-02, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021; Ord. No. 2021-12-06, § I, 12-14-2021)
Secs. 14-2—14-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
Sec. 14-21. Purposes.
(a)	It is the purpose of this article to establish public policies for the protection of the natural environment and to establish requirements, standards and procedures for land development. The public policy objective of protecting the natural environment is to be achieved by: 
(1)	Regulating the alteration of land and topography. 
(2)	Regulating the removal and requiring the replacement of certain vegetation. 
(3)	Requiring erosion control and sedimentation control. 
(4)	Protecting city streams and floodplains from substantial alteration of their natural functions and from sediment and debris accumulation. 
(5)	Specifying standards for drainage system design. 
(6)	Assuring the continuous and efficient operation of the drainage system. 
(7)	Protecting the water quality within intermittent and perennial streams throughout city. 
(b)	It is the city's intent that land development be accomplished in conformity with the public policy statements. To that end, the plans required under applicable provisions of this article shall be reviewed by the city to enable a full exchange of information between the city and the applicant as to the city's public policies for land development. However, these policies shall not be used as a control or regulatory mechanism nor be construed as land development standards enforceable under applicable provisions of this article. 
(c)	The city further declares its intent that these public policies be evaluated periodically so as to reflect the community's interests in protection of the natural environment and to give direction to city actions in matters affecting the natural environment and land development. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-05, § 1(14-28), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-22. Scope and applicability.
(a)	The provisions of this article shall apply to all development activity within the city. 
(b)	For purposes of this section, a valid and complete application for a land disturbance permit shall consist of the following: 
(1)	Four copies of complete civil plans, that include a site plan, a grading and drainage plan, a utility plan, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, a landscape plan, and a tree survey; 
(2)	Two copies of the hydrology report; 
(3)	An application signed by the owner of the property, or a completed indemnification agreement signed by the owner of the property; and 
(4)	Payment of the appropriate development review application fee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-05, § 1(14-29), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-23. Administration and enforcement generally.
The city shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article as follows: 
(1)	The community development director is designated to administer and enforce the grading, vegetation, erosion control, sedimentation control, drainage and water quality provisions of this article for all development and construction projects with the following duties and responsibilities: 
a.	Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
b.	Advise the applicant when additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known to be required, that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit; and 
c.	Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)	The community development director shall administer and enforce those provisions of this article that apply to developed and occupied areas and to property in an undeveloped state affecting city responsibility for maintenance of the storm drainage system. The community development director shall ensure that maintenance is provided within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(3)	All permits shall be in compliance with all of the terms and conditions of all applicable zoning, special land use permit, variance, and special exception cases. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-05, § 1(14-31), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2017-08-07, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 14-24. Inspection; right of entry.
(a)	Upon presentation of city identification to the applicant, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, city employees may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing development or construction. These employees may make inspections of the facilities for the purpose of determining plan requirements or compliance with all ordinance provisions. 
(b)	All new developments and redevelopments shall execute an inspection and maintenance agreement unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city. The applicant shall execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement that will bind all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice. 
(c)	City employees may inspect any drainage system within or outside of an existing drainage easement. All stormwater management facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the city or not, shall be accessible at all times for city inspection. Where stormwater management facilities are accepted by the city for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided. Reasonable access shall be provided to all drainage easements for inspection and maintenance functions. 
(d)	The department, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section. The warrant shall authorize the community development director to conduct a search or inspection of property without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section. 
(1)	Inspection warrants may be issued by municipal court when all of the following conditions are met: 
a.	The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property; and 
b.	The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by law. 
(2)	The inspection warrant shall be validly issued only if it meets all of the following requirements: 
a.	The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant; 
b.	The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection; 
c.	The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal; and 
d.	The warrant refers, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-05, § 1(14-32), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-25. Emergency maintenance operations.
(a)	The community development director or the public works director may conduct emergency maintenance operations on private land and on drainage systems where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall constitute the removal of trees and other debris, which in the judgment of the community development director or the public works director create a condition potentially injurious to life, property and the public road system. 
(b)	Emergency maintenance conducted on any drainage system shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-05, § 1(14-33), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-26. Issuance of notice of violation; variances; time period for correction; appeals.
(a)	Notice of violation. Whenever the community development director determines that development activity or inactivity on a property does not comply with the approved development and construction plans, that approved and required erosion and sedimentation control facilities or devices have been altered, damaged or destroyed, or that any other activities violate the provisions of this article, the community development director shall issue a notice of violation. Whenever the community development director determines that the drainage system has been unlawfully altered, causing inadequate drainage, the community development director or designee shall issue a notice of violation. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other penalty provisions applicable to this article. The notice of violation of the provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto shall be addressed to the owner of the property or the owner's agent and to the person, tenant, firm, corporation, property owner or property owner's agent found to be violating the provisions of this article and shall: 
(1)	Be in writing; 
(2)	Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred; 
(3)	List the specific provisions of this article which have been violated; 
(4)	State that, if these repairs, construction or alterations are not completed within a reasonable time period specified by the inspector, summons shall be issued for the person, firm, corporation, owner, or owner's agent to appear in municipal court. However, in the judgment of the community development director, where the violation is willful, in wanton disregard of the provisions of this article or constitutes a public health and safety hazard or endangers the ecosystem, the community development director may issue a court summons in lieu of a notice of violation. 
(b)	Penalty. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended. Any person, firm or corporation that shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation in municipal court shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-11. Where any offense or violation continues from day-to-day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. The owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this article exists, and any architect, builder, engineer, contractor, or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits, or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)	Variances.
(1)	Except as further limited herein, an applicant may request a variance from the terms of the requirements of sections 14-28, 14-29 and article IV of this chapter. The community development director shall have no power to consider or to grant variances which are the responsibility of the director of the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 and other relevant state statutes and regulations. Where variances involving the same project are requested from both the director of the EPD and the community development director, the community development director shall take no action on any such request for variance until the director of the EPD grants the variance or otherwise approves the request pending before the EPD. Receiving a variance from the director of the EPD does not obligate the community development director to permit the project to proceed if the project does not also meet all the other requirements of this article. No variance from the provisions of this chapter shall be authorized except as specifically authorized in this section or specifically authorized in another section of this chapter. 
(2)	Applications for variances authorized in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be made in writing to the community development director and shall contain all of those materials and documents required by the community development director that are necessary to demonstrate that the request meets the criteria for granting variances. 
(3)	In considering a request for a variance to the terms of this article authorized in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the community development director shall use all of the following criteria: 
a.	The request, while not strictly meeting the requirements of this chapter, will in the judgment of the community development director be at least as protective of natural resources and the environment as would a plan which met the strict application of these requirements. In making such a judgment, the community development director shall examine whether the request will be at least as protective of the natural resources and the environment with regard to the following factors: 
1.	Stream bank or soil stabilization; 
2.	Trapping of sediment in surface runoff; 
3.	Removal of nutrients, heavy metals, pesticides and other pollutants from surface runoff; 
4.	Terrestrial habitat, food chain, and migration corridor; 
5.	Buffering of flood flows; 
6.	Infiltration of surface runoff; 
7.	Noise and visual buffers; 
8.	Downstream water quality; and 
9.	Impact on threatened and endangered species, as those species are designated by law or federal or state regulation. 
b.	By reason of exceptional topographic or other relevant physical conditions of the subject property that were not created by the owner or applicant, there is no opportunity for any development under any design configuration unless a variance is granted. 
c.	The request does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief and does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties that are similarly situated. 
d.	The grant of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the area in which the property is located. 
e.	The literal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of this chapter would cause an extreme hardship, provided the hardship was not created by the owner. 
(4)	The community development director's decision shall be in writing, shall state the basis for the decision, and shall be made no more than 30 days following application. 
(d)	Appeals.
(1)	Generally. Appeals shall be made to the board of appeals, as established in chapter 27 of this Code, and shall be administered in accordance with the notice requirements, criteria and procedural requirements set forth therein, except as otherwise specified below. 
(2)	Basis for appeal. Whenever the community development director approves a variance pursuant to subsection (c) of this section and it is alleged that the variance request did not meet the standards of the section, or where the community development director denies a variance request pursuant to subsection (c) of this section and it is alleged that the variance request did meet the standards of the section, or where it is alleged by the applicant that there is an error in any final order, requirement, or final decision made by an administrative official based on or made in the interpretation or enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved person, or any city official, department, board or agency affected by the order, requirement or decision, shall have the right to appeal the final order, requirement or decision to the board of appeals. 
(3)	Initiation of appeal. Appeals shall be made by filing with the secretary of the board of appeals an application for appeal specifying the grounds thereof, within 30 days after the action appealed from was taken. 
(4)	Appeal stays all legal proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in that official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the superior court of the county on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(5)	Time and notice of hearing. The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the appeal and shall give notice thereof pursuant to the requirements of section 27-1666. 
(6)	Decision of the board of appeals. Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the board of appeals shall make a determination on each appeal. The board of appeals shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the final hearing. An appeal shall be sustained only upon an express finding by the board of appeals that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board of appeals may reserve or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. 
(e)	Appeals of final decisions. All appeals of final decisions of the board of appeals under the provisions of this article shall be as follows: 
(1)	Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the board of appeals, or any officer, department, board or agency affected by such decision, may seek review of such decision by petitioning the superior court of the county for a writ of certiorari, setting forth plainly the alleged errors. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the board of appeals is rendered. 
(2)	In any such petition filed, the board of appeals shall be designated the respondent in certiorari and city shall be designated the defendant in certiorari. The secretary of the board of appeals shall be authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ for the board of appeals as respondent. Service upon the city as defendant shall be as otherwise provided by law. Within the time prescribed by law, the board of appeals shall cause to be filed with the clerk of the county superior court a duly certified record of the proceedings had before the board, including a transcript of the evidence heard before it, if any, and the decision of the board. 
(f)	Private agreements, covenants, and restrictions. This article is not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or other private agreement or legal relationship provided that when the regulations of this article are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements or legal relationships, the regulations of this article shall govern. Further, where there is a conflict between any standard or requirement within this chapter, or between the standards of this chapter and any other provision of the Code, the more restrictive standard or requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-05, § 1(14-34), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 14-27. Plan submission requirements.
(a)	All site plans submitted in accordance with applicable provisions of this article shall meet the requirements for their preparation and shall also provide information to enable a determination to be made by the community development director as to plan conformance with the public policy statements of this article. 
(b)	All persons proposing developments, redevelopments or construction shall submit site plans to the community development director illustrating the means by which conformance with policy provisions may be achieved and illustrating compliance with applicable development standards before issuance of a development or building permit. 
(c)	Electric, telephone and gas utilities shall submit plans and obtain a development permit only for major transmission installations located within rights-of-way or easements devoted exclusively to installations of utility facilities. Individual single-family lots within approved subdivisions shall be exempt from these requirements for new residential construction with the exception that individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots are located within the intermediate regional floodplain shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with this article and other applicable provisions of the Code. Owners and developers of individual single-family lots shall be required to use best management practices to prevent sedimentation from leaving the site. 
(d)	Grading, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and drainage plans shall be prepared under the supervision of a currently state-registered professional engineer, architect or landscape architect, or combination as may be appropriate for project planning and design. Tree protection plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements specified in article III of this chapter. When the hydrologic engineering analysis includes applications of the principles for flood routing, super critical flow, high energy dissipation or conversion, backwater curves, floodplain studies or other advanced hydrologic engineering techniques, the analysis shall be made by a currently state-registered professional engineer proficient in hydrology. 
(e)	Site plans and supporting documentation to show conformance with this article shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable provisions of chapter 27 and all conditions of zoning and shall include the following: 
(1)	Evidence of conformance with the requirements of this article for grading, vegetation alteration, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and drainage system alteration or development. Grading plans shall illustrate existing and proposed contours to the two-foot interval at a minimum; golf courses and other open space areas shall be exempt from this requirement but general grading plans for golf courses and other open space areas shall be submitted. Water quality plans shall include the identification of existing wetland areas within the development site and shall demonstrate use of the stormwater quality site development review tool. Related plans shall show locations of structures, roads, surface drainage, existing and proposed drainage conduits, buffer areas, stream buffers, state buffer zones, and proposed alterations to the existing site; 
(2)	A hydrologic engineering analysis of stormwater runoff under pre-developed and post-developed site conditions and a detailed evaluation of the projected effects on upstream and downstream properties within the affected drainage basin. In determining downstream effects from stormwater management structures, BMPs, and the development, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering studies shall extend downstream to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten percent of the total watershed. This analysis shall include a determination of the culvert, floodplain and channel cross-section area required to carry the affected runoff at the intermediate regional flood stage level. The requirement for a complete hydrologic study may be waived in writing by the community development director for any development where the site plan submitted illustrates predeveloped or proposed improvements sufficient to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this article; 
(3)	Delineation of the boundaries, contour elevations and floodways of the intermediate regional floodplain for streams draining in excess of 100 acres. Unless shown on the flood hazard map, the intermediate regional flood contour elevations and floodways shall be established by engineering field control surveys and then be added to the flood hazard map upon approval of the community development director and be clearly designated on each site plan, subdivision plat and construction plan. The actual building site in relation to the intermediate regional floodplain boundaries shall be shown; the same information shall be indicated by the seller to the purchaser of each property so affected. The elevation contours representing the intermediate regional flood conditions shall be shown when they are located outside established ditch banks. A benchmark suitable for determining intermediate regional flood elevations shall be established; 
(4)	The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, vegetation, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and drainage plans as related to other major items of construction; 
(5)	Upon development project completion, location, size and invert elevations of piped segments of the storm drainage system, of control weirs, BMPs and water surface elevations and volumes in detention ponds shall be shown on the final plat for a subdivision, and on a final plan for other developments which shall be submitted to the community development director prior to approval. The currently state-registered professional engineer, architect or landscape architect reviewing the construction shall provide a certificate that the development is in substantial compliance with approved plans. As-built elevation certifications prepared by currently state-registered land surveyors or currently state-registered professional engineers for all developments, including fill, allowed within a floodprone area, shall be submitted to the community development director; and 
(6)	A separate tree protection plan in conformance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-05, § 1(14-35), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-28. Grading.
(a)	Policies. It is declared to be public policy to: 
(1)	Encourage the design of residential grading plans to provide natural appearance of land contours and to provide ease of use in public areas. 
(2)	Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading upon existing vegetation. 
(3)	Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading upon the drainage system by strict erosion control and sedimentation control measures. 
(4)	Minimize erosion and shear failure potential by encouraging limited cutting and filling. 
(b)	Standards.
(1)	All grading operations shall be conducted in compliance with the approved site plans. 
(2)	Before beginning construction activity, the intermediate regional floodplain elevation contours shall be identified on the property by staking or other identifying mechanisms no less than every 100 feet, and shall be identifiable throughout project development. 
(3)	Finish grade slopes on residential projects and lots shall not be steeper than three-to-one, unless absolutely impractical due to vegetation, topography, or soil conditions. Three-to-one finish grade slopes shall transition to two-to-one slopes at all perpendicular stream crossings. 
(4)	Large-scale general grading shall include installation of approved soil and erosion control measures and be limited to phases approved by the community development director and completed prior to commencing building construction. 
(5)	Prohibit grading and filling in floodplains, except for the construction and maintenance of perpendicular crossings of public utilities, drainage conveyances, roadways, sidewalks, and multi-purpose trails constructed in accordance with city design standards and specifications. Any variance from the requirements of this subsection shall be in accordance with the requirements of section 14-26 and shall comply with the requirements stipulated within article VIII of this chapter, floodplain management. 
(6)	The burying, piling, or concealing in any way of construction waste is prohibited, except where permitted within an M-2 (Industrial) District, as defined in chapter 27, and by a permit issued by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-05, § 1(14-37), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-29. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
(a)	Policies. It is declared to be public policy to: 
(1)	Minimize the removal of vegetation; 
(2)	Minimize the exposure of bare earth to precipitation by encouraging the scheduling of land development in increments of workable size which can be completed within a single construction season or within a time period compatible with the type and size of the project; 
(3)	Provide for the reestablishment of vegetation within a reasonable period following completion of final grading and utility installation; 
(4)	Give priority to the paving of streets, parking lots and other areas within a reasonable time following completion of final grading; and 
(5)	Encourage the use of erosion control and sedimentation techniques found in the manual for erosion and sedimentation control in the state, as published by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
(b)	Standards.
(1)	General requirements. Any land-disturbing activity permitted under this chapter shall be carried out in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended; this chapter; and the permit conditions specified by the community development director. 
(2)	Minimum requirements. Nothing contained in state law or this chapter shall prevent the issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements contained in this section or in state law. 
(3)	Exemptions. This section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
a.	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, a part of the Georgia Surface Mine Act of 1968; 
b.	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
c.	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
d.	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this section; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in subsection (b)(4) of this section. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this section, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the community development department may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b)(4) of this section and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the development department; 
e.	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
f.	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; providing, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections (b)(4)c.15 and 16 of this section, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
g.	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the federal department of agriculture; 
h.	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this section, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (b)(3)a—g, i, or j of this section; 
i.	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any city or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.2; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
j.	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
k.	Any public water system reservoir. 
(4)	Minimum requirement for soil erosion and control and sedimentation control using best management practices.
a.	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities that are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosions and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b)(4)b and c of this section and any other applicable provision of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, stormwater management facilities, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with the requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. The community development director may require that land disturbance activity be phased. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall address appropriate measures to effectively control soil erosion during successive phases of construction. 
b.	Minimum requirements.
1.	Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b)(4)b and c of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design by phases, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director of the environmental protection division (EPD) or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(4)b.2 of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
2.	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the EPD. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3.	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.	The director of the EPD may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the BNR, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
5.	The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in C.15 and 16, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
c.	Rules and regulations governing land-disturbing activities. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, at a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.	Cut-fill operations shall be kept to a minimum; 
3.	Development plans shall conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
4.	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented as provided in articles III and V of this chapter; 
5.	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.	To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
10.	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.	Cuts and fills shall not endanger adjoining property; 
12.	Fills shall not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.	Grading equipment shall cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediment on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(4)b.2 of this section; 
15.	Except as provided in subsection (b)(4)c.16 of this section, there is established a 25-foot state buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director of the EPD determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director of the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-5 et seq., shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director of the EPD as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
(i)	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quality to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(ii)	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
A.	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
B.	Stream crossings for sewer lines; 
16.	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the BNR, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director of the EPD may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
(i)	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(ii)	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
A.	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
B.	Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
d.	Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection (4)(b), (c) of this section. 
e.	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(5)	Application/permit process.
a.	Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner or operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
b.	Application requirements.
1.	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of city without first obtaining a permit from the community development department to perform such activity, and providing a copy of the notice of intent, if applicable, to the EPD. 
2.	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the community development department and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, at a minimum, the data specified in subsection (b)(5)c of this section. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD rule 391-3-7-.10 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-7-.10). 
3.	A permitting fee, as determined by the city council shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
4.	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
5.	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the community development department. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection (b)(4)c.15 and 16 of this section and bonding if required by subsection (b)(5)b.7 of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if city and the district enter into an agreement which allows city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
6.	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the community development department may deny the permit application. 
7.	The community development department may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city manager may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
c.	Plan requirements.
1.	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection (b)(4)b and c of this section, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
2.	Data required for the site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
d.	Permits.
1.	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but, in any event, not later than 45 days after receipt by the community development department of a completed application, provided variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary; no permit may be issued unless all applicable fees have been paid. 
2.	Time limitation of application. An application for a land disturbance permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 90 days from the issuance of the most recent review comments provided by the city. The city engineer is authorized to grant up to three written extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each before such application is declared abandoned. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
3.	No permit shall be issued by the community development department unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the community development department has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsection (b)(4)c.15 and 16 of this section are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b.7 of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
4.	Any land-disturbing activity by the governing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this section, and any other ordinances relating to land development as are applied to private persons, and the community development director shall enforce such requirements upon the governing authority. 
5.	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
6.	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
7.	No permit shall be issued until the applicant files documents with the community development department demonstrating compliance with all applicable local, state and federal requirements. 
8.	A development permit shall be valid for two years from its issuance subject to the following provisions: 
(i)	If the work authorized in any development permit has not begun within 90 days from the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall expire. 
(ii)	If the work described in any development permit has not been substantially completed within two years of the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall expire. 
(iii)	Written notice of the expiration shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. 
(iv)	The city engineer is authorized to grant one written extension of a development permit for a period of not more than 90 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(v)	The director of community development is authorized to grant one additional written extension of a development permit for a period of not more than 90 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(vi)	All additional extension requests shall be heard by city council. Extension requests shall be submitted in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated at least 30 days prior to the permit expiration date. The extension request will be placed on the next available city council agenda. 
(6)	Inspection and enforcement.
a.	The community development department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the city shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbance activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this section, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person by the community development department. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
b.	The community development department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may reasonably be necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
c.	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or the division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
d.	The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of the city. The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to city for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the city's erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if the city's program is found to be deficient or ineffective. 
e.	The division may periodically review the actions of the city which has been certified as a local issuing authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of city's ordinances and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and city. If such review indicates that city has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the city governing authority in writing. Upon receipt of the notification, the governing authority shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the city does not take necessary action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of city as a local issuing authority. 
(7)	Penalties and incentives.
a.	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining the permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within unincorporated city. 
b.	Stop work orders. Upon notice from the community development department or other city-authorized representative, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
1.	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this section on a site, the community development department shall issue a written notice of violation. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the community development department shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state, the community development department shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
2.	For a third and each subsequent violation on a site, the community development department shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
3.	All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.	When a violation in the form of land disturbance without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the community development department, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the community development department. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
c.	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served by the community development department upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection (b)(5)b.7 of this section. The city manager may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
d.	Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this section, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this section, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the community development department issued as provided in this section shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, and may be subject to the provisions of section 1-11. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate offense. 
(8)	Education and certification.
a.	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection of any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
b.	For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of the entity or person; the persons shall meet the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission, and maintain evidence of the certification present whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on the site. A project shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site, or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale, permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
c.	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit, but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site, may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this section. 
d.	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(4), but shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in the paragraph. 
(9)	Administrative appeal, judicial review.
a.	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to an appeal before the board of appeals pursuant to the procedures and standards set forth in section 14-26(d). 
b.	Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by administrative appeals from a decision or order of the board of appeals authorized by subsection (b)(9)a of this section shall be as provided for in section 14-26(d). 
(10)	Liability.
a.	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this section nor the compliance with provisions of this section shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon city, the district, its officers or employees for damage to any person or property. 
b.	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
c.	No provision of this section shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-05, § 1(14-38), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2017-08-07, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-06, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019; Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2019-11-05, § I(Attch.), 11-26-2019; Ord. No. 2021-12-06, § I, 12-14-2021)
Secs. 14-30—14-46. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. TREE PRESERVATION, MANAGEMENT, AND MAINTENANCE
Sec. 14-47. Purpose and intent.
In order to maintain and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the community, the city has established regulations governing the preservation and replacement of trees. Trees contribute to quality of life by producing oxygen, sequestering carbon, filtering pollutants from the air, cooling the environment through transpiration and the casting of shade, reducing stormwater runoff, filtering storm water and ground water, holding and building soil, reducing urban noise and glare, privacy screening, and providing habitat and food to other organisms. Trees also increase property values and are a vital component of the visual quality of the city. The city council finds that trees, and especially specimen trees (as defined in this article) are unique and not fungible. The removal or threat of removal of trees cannot ever be cured by purely legal remedies and the unique location, growth, protection, geography, and space of a tree on a lot and in a neighborhood is not capable of adequate compensation or replacement. For these reasons, trees are recognized by the city as a critical component of the city's infrastructure and shall be managed collectively as an urban forest. 
These regulations are intended to prevent the indiscriminate removal of trees while balancing the reasonable use and enjoyment of real property by the owner. 
The city council further finds that, to support its tree canopy preservation goals, trees removed as part of any city capital improvement project will be tracked for replacement with sufficient plantings to achieve a reasonable canopy within a five-year growth period, where possible, as reviewed and approved by the Tree Canopy Preservation Division and approved by the Director of Community Development. Replacement within the limits of city stormwater projects will not be required. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2021-07-01, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § i, 10-25-2022; Ord. No. 2023-09-05, § I, 9-26-2023)
Sec. 14-48. General applicability.
(a)	Each property owner or agent acting on behalf of the property owner shall be responsible for the normal care of trees located on its premises. 
(b)	Willful injury or disfigurement of any tree growing within the city shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)	No person shall: 
(1)	Remove any tree as defined herein without a permit. 
(2)	Attach any sign, notice or other object to any tree or fasten wires, cables, nails, or screws to any tree in a manner that could prove harmful to the tree. 
(3)	Pour any material on any tree or on nearby ground which could be harmful to the tree. 
(4)	Cause or encourage any unnecessary fire or burning near or around any tree. 
(5)	Construct a concrete, asphalt, brick, or gravel sidewalk, significantly compact the soil, place fill material, or create other impervious or semi-impervious surfaces around any tree so as to cut off air, light, or water from the roots of the tree so as to adversely impact the tree's root system. 
(6)	Pile building material or equipment around any tree so as to cause injury thereto. 
(7)	Deny routine maintenance, watering, and reasonable arboricultural care to existing and newly established trees as may be required as a result of activities taking place under this section. 
(8)	Prune a tree in a way that is not consistent with ISA /ANSI A300 industry standard protocols, including but not limited to spiking or wearing spikes, spurs, or gaffs while pruning, cutting a branch below the branch collar, penetrating the vascular tissue during rigging operations, pruning more than 25 percent of the crown, removing a branch with a diameter that is greater than one half the diameter of the main stem (trunk), making "topping" or "heading" cuts, or pruning a crown in such a manner that creates significant asymmetry. 
(9)	Remove a tree on a city right-of-way without written approval from the Director. 
(10)	Kill or damage a tree due to neglectful operation of a vehicle or equipment of any kind or during felling, removal, or rigging operations associated with another tree. 
(11)	Kill or damage a tree due to grading or disturbance, including sod installation, within the structural root plate, critical root zone, or the designated tree protection area on a city-approved site plan. This includes during the site final landscape and stabilization phase. 
(d)	This article applies to the development of all property lying within the city, inclusive of property owned by the city, its agencies, authorities, and affiliated entities, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022)
Sec. 14-49. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)	The removal of trees from horticultural properties such as farms, nurseries, or orchards. This exception shall not be interpreted to include timber harvesting incidental to development of the land; 
(2)	The necessary removal of trees by a public utility or the city within permanent utility easements or public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2021-07-01, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021)
Sec. 14-50. Definitions.
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
ANSI A300 means ANSI standards for tree care operations. 
Approved tree(s) means any tree assessed to be in fair or good condition and identified as a species which is listed on the Approved Tree List in the Arborist Standards Document (ASD) by a qualified professional. 
Arborist means a person who is professionally trained in the science of trees. The typical professional certification is by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). 
Arborist standards document (ASD) means a document maintained by the City of Brookhaven Tree Division that includes clarifications to requirements with examples and additional technical standards about tree protection, tree planting, species selection, and other information relevant to the protection and replanting of trees in the City of Brookhaven. The document may be revised by the city arborist as conditions and technical standards evolve. 
Boundary tree means any tree located on adjacent property with a critical root zone that extends into the soil of an adjacent property. 
Buffer means an area required to remain undisturbed or replanted where existing vegetation is sparse, as determined by the director. 
Caliper means a standard of trunk measurement for replacement trees. Caliper inches are measured at the height of six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four-inch caliper and 12 inches above the ground for trees larger than four-inch caliper. 
Canopy means the branch spread of a tree or tree stand. 
Canopy cover means the area of ground directly beneath the canopy of a tree or tree stand. See table. 


Champion tree. Any tree that is listed on, or is pending official recognition based on observations from a qualified professional, including a city arborist, for the Atlanta's Champion Tree List. Trees are placed on the list based on a combination of physical characteristics, including diameter, height, spread, and condition. The current list can be found at https://www.treesatlanta.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Trees-Atlanta-Champion-Trees-2022.pdf. 
Conifer tree means any tree with needle leaves and a woody cone fruit including, but not limited to, Pine (Pinus), Juniper (Juniperus and Cedar (Cedrus) species. Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum) and Dawn Redwood (Metasequoia glyptostroboides) are deciduous (shed leaves in autumn and have a period of dormancy) conifer trees. 
Critical root zone (CRZ) means the minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one and three-tenths times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. Example: The CRZ radius of a 20-inch diameter tree is 26 feet. This article does not allow for CRZ percent impact to exceed 30 percent; Tree care prescriptions are required if CRZ percent impact is 20-30 percent or at the discretion of the City arborist due to the intensive nature of proposed impact- including but not limited to any portion of a stormwater device, pool or spa, or construction exit encroaching within a CRZ. 
Crown means the scaffold limbs, branches, twigs, buds, and leaves of a tree. 
DDH means an abbreviation commonly used in the profession of arboriculture, which stands for dead, dying, and hazardous. It is an official tree condition assessment that can only be made by a qualified professional. Most DDH trees will not meet the criteria for emergency tree removal and require a standard tree removal permit as described in section 14-54(c). 
Dead tree means any standing tree which is no longer alive or has the ability to sustain itself through natural processes as determined by a qualified professional. 
Department means the department of community development. 
Development activity means any alteration of the natural environment, which requires the approval of a development or site plan and issuance of any type of a land development permit. Development activity shall also include the "thinning" or removal of trees from land in conjunction with a forest management program, the removal or destruction of trees incidental to the development of land or to the marketing of land for development, the removal or destruction of trees in conjunction with any grading activity, including the removal or filling (stockpiling) of soil, and logging or the removal of trees not in conjunction with an ongoing forest management program. Nothing in this definition shall be deemed to require or authorize the issuance of a permit for any activity described herein. 
Diameter breast-height (DBH) means the standard measure of tree size (for trees existing on a site). The tree trunk is measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Director means the director of the department of community development or designee that shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Emergency tree removal means the removal of any or all parts of a tree that has been completely displaced or has been severely damaged or compromised by a storm or other sudden act of nature. Immediate notice must be provided to the city via email or phone, and a retroactive tree removal permit, including photographic evidence substantiating damages and/or immediate hazardous conditions, must be submitted to the city within five days of the tree failure and removal. 
Frontage. Per chapter 14, article I, section 14-1, Definitions, frontage means the distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Front yard. A yard extending the full width of the lot (between the side lot lines) between the principal building and the street right-of-way (Sec. 27-1383). 
Frontage plantable area means the pervious portion of the frontage which is offset at least five feet from all property lines and impervious surfaces and at least 10 feet from any permanent structure. *Schematic drawing provided in the arborist standards document. 
Grading activity means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenspace means that portion of a commercial, residential townhome, and residential subdivision permitting property which is pervious, vegetated and occupied with naturally occurring native species, and which is accessible to all persons occupying a building on the property. 
Hardwood tree means any tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing). This definition is based on the colloquialism and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. Another colloquial term that is often used synonymously with "Hardwood" is "Broadleaf." 
International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) means a professional organization that promotes the professional practice of arboriculture, sets standards for obtaining professional credentials for arborist, and establishes best practices for tree care, pruning, and protection. 
Invasive species means any species that is not native to that ecosystem; and whose introduction does or is likely to cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human health. For the purposes of this article, the guiding document will be the Georgia Exotic Pest Plant Council (EPPC) Invasive Plant List, which is maintained by the Center for Invasive Species and Ecosystem Health, University of Georgia. https://www.gaeppc.org/list/ 
Joint-ownership boundary tree means a tree which has any portion of the bottom four and one-half feet of its trunk extending into more than one property. Due to the state survey allowance of margin of error , a survey location verification may be requested in determining the ownership status of a tree. 
LDP means land disturbance permit. 
Level 2 tree assessment means the tree evaluation system (pre-dating ISA TRAQ) in which a qualified professional walks completely around a tree and looks for defects in all visible areas of a tree, including the surrounding area. Diagnostic techniques may also include the use of a mallet for resonance testing, a soil probe, and binoculars. The condition of a tree is typically reported as dead, poor, fair, or good. *Although good is the highest industry tree assessment rating, this article accepts supplemental photographs and notes supporting a recommendation for any tree to be considered as a tree of quality, which would categorize the subject trees as having special qualities that make it superior to other trees assessed as good. Level 2 Tree Assessments must be conducted within the last 50 days from the date of submittal to the City for review. 
Mature canopy size means the potential amount of canopy that can be expected for a tree species at maturity, categorized as small (400 square feet), medium (900 square feet) and large (1,600 square feet). Available soil volume is another factor in the size potential of a tree. 
Mulch means an organic matter material spread around the base of a plant or elsewhere on the ground to enrich and insulate the soil. Mulch should never make contact with a tree above the root collar. Acceptable types of mulch include: 
º Pine straw, shredded hardwood, wood chips, bark chips, or leaf litter; 
º Synthetic or artificial mulches are not acceptable for use in tree installations or as a tree protection layer in the City of Brookhaven. 
Organic matter (soil) means the top layer of soil consisting of three primary parts including fresh plant residues and small living soil organisms, decomposing (active) organic matter, and stable organic matter (humus). 
Overstory tree or large tree means trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet and a mature branch spread of 1,600 square feet or more. 
Permit means any tree removal permit, land disturbance permit, building permit, or demolition permit which are officially issued by the city. 
Plantable area means the pervious surface area available for the preservation or planting of trees. Plantable area shall not include that portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and structures permitted pursuant to the maximum lot coverage standards of this article. 
Pruning (tree pruning) means to cut away dead, overgrown, or undesirable branches or stems. Pruning of trees to be done in compliance with standard arboricultural practices as outlined in ANSI A300 and shall maintain the trees natural form and structure. This includes the ornamental tree Crepe Myrtle (Lagerstroemia). 
Qualified professional means an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) Certified Arborist, an American Society of Consulting Arborists (ASCA) Registered Consulting Arborist, or a registered forester. 
Recompense means replacement of trees or payment into the city held tree fund for the removal of specimen trees. 
Replacement tree. Any tree required to be planted in association with compliance with any part of Chapter 14, Article III of the Brookhaven Code of Ordinances (Tree Preservation, Management, and Maintenance). 
Semi-pervious means hardscape, aggregate, or porous paver that allows at least 50 percent of surface water to pass through the manmade material and into the underlying soil. 
Shrub means a woody plant smaller than a tree, usually having multiple permanent stems branching from or near the ground. 
Specimen tree means any tree which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, type, condition, location, or historical significance and which also meets the minimum size criteria set forth in the specimen tree table. The tree must be assessed to be in fair, good, or excellent health by a qualified professional on at least a Level 2 tree health assessment. The presence of invasive vining vegetation, lean, or co-dominance are not automatic disqualifiers for specimen tree status. 
Structural root plate means the zone of rapid root taper that provides the tree stability against wind throw and soil saturation. The radius of the structural root plate is equal to one-half feet per inch of DBH. The structural root plate will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the trunk of the tree. The structural root plate of all preserved trees must be completely within the tree protection area - no disturbance of any kind is permitted with the structural root plate. 
Tree Any living, self-supporting woody plant which normally obtains a stem diameter at breast height (4.5 feet above the ground). 
Tree care prescription means a tree care plan developed by a qualified professional based on multiple variables, including scope of impact, immediate growing conditions and environment, species, size, and condition of tree. Tree care prescriptions will often include application dates in multiple seasons. Applications typically include root zone fertilization and preventative trunk sprays for wood-boring insects. They may also include root and crown pruning as needed, post-construction soil decompaction with compressed air, and the application of growth regulators into the root zone. Required tree care prescriptions are to be submitted to the city arborist for review and must provide sufficient remediation for the subject tree(s) based on the size, species, condition, and details of proposed impact(s) with the critical root zone. 
Tree fund means a monetary account maintained by the finance department of the city to which monetary recompense for the removal of specimen trees is paid. 
Tree of quality means a tree that merits special consideration due to ideal shape, structure, condition, species, and projected lifespan as determined by a qualified professional and the city arborist. Any candidate tree must be assessed as "good" on a Level 2 health assessment. A qualified professional must submit supplemental photographs and notes supporting their recommendation for any tree to be considered as a tree of quality. Trees of quality will be assigned the same preservation credits as specimen trees although they may not meet the minimum diameter criterium (section 14-52 (b)—(g)), so long as at least 80 percent of the critical root zone (CRZ) is protected. 
Tree protection area means an area encompassing the critical root zone of a tree that shall remain in a pervious state and undisturbed. 
Tree removal or destruction of tree means removal of trees through an act of cutting down a tree or any act which causes a tree to die within two years after commission of the act or impedes the ability of the tree to sustain itself, including, but not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system, trunk, or canopy as a result of: 
(1)	The improper use of machinery on the tree or on its critical root zone; 
(2)	The storage of materials in or around the trees; 
(3)	Soil compaction; 
(4)	Altering the grade to expose the roots; depositing fill soil or subsoil over the tree's root system; or piling material including, but not limited to, soil and mulch against the tree above the root collar; 
(5)	Pruning that is not consistent with ISA and ANSI professional standards; 
(6)	Application of herbicides or defoliants to any tree without a permit; 
(7)	Incidental application of herbicides to any tree (herbicide drift beyond target pest/s). 
Tree stand means a community of trees as determined by the director to merit special consideration as an ecological feature based upon species composition, form, structure, age, condition, and soil quality. Specimen trees and trees of quality may or may not be included in tree stands and every alternative should be evaluated to save these trees and soil. 
Understory tree means trees that occupy an ecological niche beneath the cover of larger tree species and have a relatively small canopy (branch spread) of approximately 400 square feet at maturity. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2021-07-01, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022; Ord. No. 2023-09-05, § I, 9-26-2023)
Sec. 14-51. Minimum tree density and canopy cover requirements.
Summary. The intent and goal of these regulations is to ensure that a minimum density of trees is maintained on all properties and that a significant amount of tree canopy coverage and pervious soil area is maintained throughout the city. The density requirement must be met whether or not a property or site had trees prior to development or any tree removal. 
(1)	All properties within the city shall maintain or achieve a minimum tree density of 130 DBH inches per acre and a minimum canopy cover of 45 percent in perpetuity. 
(2)	Minimum tree density may be achieved by and must be compliant with these guidelines: 
a.	Preserving approved trees four inches or greater DBH; All trees counting toward the minimum requirements must be approved trees per section 14-50. At least 80 percent of the critical root zone and the entire structural root plate must be protected from all forms of encroachment and construction activity; 
b.	Tree care prescriptions must be provided for any tree with 20 to 30 percent CRZ impact proposed or, at the discretion of the city arborist, any tree(s) where any portion of a stormwater device, a pool or spa, construction exit, or any other intensive form of impact are proposed within the CRZ; in these cases, the total CRZ percent impact may not exceed 20 percent. 
c.	Preservation of tree stands. At the discretion of the city arborist, multiple trees growing together within a stand, may be required to be preserved collectively. Shared symbiotic root, soil, mycorrhizae, and microbial networks, wind-throw buffering, sunlight buffering, potential equipment impact, and the conditions of specific trees within the stand, per the Level 2 Tree Assessment, are factors considered in tree stand preservation. This code may apply where minimum site density exists. 
d.	Planting approved trees in accordance with the minimum standards of this section, where tree removal or land development results in a deficit of minimum tree density or canopy cover; 
e.	No property permitted for new development activity may remove all existing trees whose structural root plates are outside the buildable limits; this applies to existing approved trees; 
f.	All trees must be free from invasive vining and understory vegetation. No damages to trees may be incurred during the removal of invasive vegetation. All vegetation that is listed on the Georgia Exotic Pest Plant Council (EPPC) Invasive Plant List (section 14-50) must be sufficiently controlled. 
g.	No approved trees located within the city public right-of-way may be removed or destroyed by owners of abutting private property or agents acting on their behalf; For permitted land disturbance, critical root zone impact of a city right-of-way tree qualifies the tree as a boundary tree as defined in section 14-50 and section 14-55(e) whereby a signed boundary tree agreement will not be required but all other necessary means of tree protection as determined by a qualified professional may be required (section. 14-57(c)); 
h.	Trees within a designated pervious buffer area may qualify for density credit if the pervious buffer restoration special consideration (section 14-56, Administrative Variances) is proposed and approved by the city arborist; 
i.	For private properties permitted under an LDP: 
1.	Two acre site or less: A section of a tree stand as defined in section 14-50, if present on the permitting property, must be preserved as greenspace (section 14-50) to include an area at least 4,000 continuous square feet or the entire tree stand if less than 4,000 square feet and is defined by the critical root zones of the existing trees; all tree preservation measures including the removal of invasive vining vegetation and invasive understory vegetation must be executed in association with the preservation of the tree stand; 
2.	More than 2 acres and less than 5.5 acre site: A section of a Tree Stand as defined in section 14-50, if present on the permitting property, must be preserved as Greenspace (section 14-50) to include an area at least 8,000 continuous square feet or the entire tree stand if less than 8,000 square feet and is defined by the critical root zones of the existing trees; all tree preservation measures including the removal of invasive vining vegetation and invasive understory vegetation must be executed in association with the preservation of the tree stand; 
3.	Five and one-half (5.5) acre site or greater: At least two tree stands an area at least 8,000 square feet must be preserved as greenspace; 
4.	No grading, addition of impervious surfaces, or other significant forms of land disturbance are permitted within the tree stand; however, low impact developmental features such as pervious trails, benches, and picnic tables are permissible. 
5.	All replacement trees associated with LDP projects are to have a minimum caliper size of three inches. 
(3)	Calculations.
 a.	Minimum 130 DBH inches per acre.
 1.	The calculations shall be for the net site area excluding the acreage required for buffers and infrastructure improvements (roads, sidewalks, utility lines, detention ponds, etc.). In no event shall a parking lot be considered an infrastructure improvement; 
2.	According to all requirements of this section, add the DBH inches of all trees preserved or planted on the property and multiply the total DBH inches by the acreage of the site; the total must equal this calculated rate or greater. For example, a one-quarter-acre lot must have at least 32.5 (0.25 acre x 130 inches = 32.5 inches) of total DBH inches; 
3.	A portion of DBH inches from approved trees located within the city public right-of-way may be counted towards the minimum density requirement so long as there is less than 20 percent CRZ impact, or root-bridging and/or arborist protection and prescription requirements are met; this allowance does not apply to boundary trees on private adjacent property; 
The density credit may be calculated by multiplying the surveyed percent canopy cover over private property by the DBH of the tree; 
For example, for a 26 inches tree where 25 percent of its canopy covers a private lot, the density credit calculates to be: (26 inches) (0.25) equals six and one-half inches. 
4.	All information shown on the tree calculation table must align with information developed by the qualified professional for the existing tree survey and level 2 assessment; 
(4)	Tree replacement.
 a.	The arborist standards document will provide a complete set of guidelines and resources to meet tree replacement requirements; replacement trees must be on the approved tree list and must be installed according to the city tree planting details; 
b.	The minimum dimension for pervious surface for all tree planting areas in the city is eight feet. For example, a street landscape strip or a parking lot tree island shall be a minimum of eight feet wide and eight feet long, where the replacement tree has a minimum of four feet of pervious surface area in all directions from its trunk. 
c.	The minimum caliper size for tree replacements required for minimum tree density or specimen tree recompense is two caliper inches; replacement trees for LDPs are subject to a larger minimum caliper size as determined by the city arborist; 
(5)	For all replacement trees: 
a.	Species selected for planting shall be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site; 
b.	All replacement tree selections are subject to review and changes by the city arborist; 
c.	A single species or variety may comprise no more than 20 percent of the full replacement schedule; 
d.	At least 60 percent of trees selected for planting must be approved overstory; 
e.	Screen conifers and dwarf Southern Magnolia cultivars may not account for more than ten percent of the full replacement schedule. Pines (Pinus sp.), Deodar Cedar (Cedrus deodara), Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum), and Dawn Redwood (Metasequoia glyptostroboides) are exempt. 
f.	A 1.5 multiplier may be credited to the caliper size for the planting of each tree for species identified on the approved replacement tree lists on the Arborist Standards Document. 
(6)	Frontage plantable area (FPA) requirements.Sec. 14-50, defines the frontage plantable area as the pervious portion of the frontage which is offset at least five feet from all property lines and impervious surfaces and at least ten feet from any permanent structure. Front yard is defined as a yard extending the full width of the lot (between the side lot lines) between the principal building and the street right-of-way (Sec. 27-1383). The preservation of existing approved trees may count towards the requirements herein. All specifications for replacement trees herein refer to perpetual tree requirements within the frontage plantable area of properties within the city: 
a.	For lots zoned RS: 
1.	For small front yards, including townhomes and high density subdivisions, with 225 square feet of pervious area or less, there shall be at least one approved small or medium tree; 
2.	For front yards with greater than 225 square feet and less than or equal to 1,600 square feet of pervious area, there shall be at least one medium tree; 
3.	For front yards with greater than 1,600 square feet and less than or equal to 3,600 square feet, there shall be at least one overstory tree; 
4.	For front yards with greater than 3,600 square feet and less than or equal to 6,400 square feet of pervious area, there shall be at least one overstory tree and one medium tree; 
5.	For front yards with greater than 6,400 square feet of pervious area, there shall be at least two overstory trees; 
6.	Reference table: 


b.	For all other districts, there must be: 
1.	At least one approved overstory tree for every 30 to 40 linear feet for all frontage plantable areas, private access road frontage plantable areas, and overlay district streetscape and landscape requirements of Chapter 27 of the Zoning Ordinance; the final on center spacing is contingent on the proposed species form and is determined at the discretion of the city arborist. 
2.	Necessary variances due to infrastructure or utilities will be assessed on a case-by-case basis by the city arborist and public works. 
c.	Tree planting easements. The city is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the owners of private property located within the city for the purpose of acquiring easements to plant trees on such property within the frontage plantable area. In consideration for which said property owner shall acquire ownership of such trees as the city may plant. Provided, however, that any such agreement shall limit the duration of the easement to a time period of three years and shall limit the property interest acquired by the city to that distance sufficient to allow the planting of trees. Provided, further, that under such agreement the private property owner shall agree to maintain the trees planted thereon and shall also agree to hold the city harmless for any liability attributable to the planting or presence of the trees on the private property. 
(7)	All tree plantings for minimum density requirements must be consistent with the Arborist Standards Document (ASD). The ASD includes, but is not limited to: 
a.	Species and varieties approved for tree planting; 
b.	American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60); 
c.	City tree installation details, which include requirements for the preparation and amendment of soils in planting areas; 
d.	Minimum caliper sizes for different permit types; 
e.	Models for tree planting design which factor mature size, spacing, pervious planting area, soil volume, light, stand/cluster planting, and understory vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2021-07-01, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021; ; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022)
Sec. 14-52. Specimen trees.
(a)	The specimen tree table is as follows: 


;adv=6;(b)	Any specimen tree preserved with less than 20 percent critical root zone impact and zero impact to the structural root plate shall be eligible for a density or canopy cover credit of one and one-half times DBH inches or area. 
(c)	Any specimen tree preserved with 20 to 33 percent critical root zone impact and zero impact to the structural root plate shall require an arborist prescription, approved by the city arborist; they shall be eligible for a density or canopy cover credit of one and one-half times DBH inches or area with an approved arborist prescription. 
(d)	The removal of any specimen tree outside the buildable limits and side setback (Ch. 27, Article II) area will require recompense at 1.5 x DBH inches. The 1.5 multiplier will not be applied to recompense calculations for the removal of any specimen tree inside the buildable limits and side setback (Ch. 27, Article II) area. Tree replacement quantity must be maximized according to industry standards for spacing, light, and soil volume. This requirement is in addition to the minimum tree density requirements. 
(e)	A tree density surplus that is achieved with tree preservation on site may be applied to any specimen tree recompense owed. 
For example, if the minimum tree density required for a site is 38 DBH inches, and 50 DBH inches are preserved, the surplus of 12 DBH inches may be applied to any specimen recompense owed. 
(f)	If the city arborist agrees that all the specimen recompense replacement trees will not fit on the site in accordance with accepted industry standards, the remaining inches owed shall be addressed by monetary payment of a recompense fee to the tree fund. Specimen recompense fees must be paid within 180 days from the date of notice of approval from the City and prior to issuance of the approved permit. 
(g)	In a case where a specimen tree or trees are removed without or prior to the issuance of an approved permit from the City, all applicable specimen recompense fees shall be paid to the City within 180 days from the date on which the violator(s) are served a court summons/citation for the offense(s). Failure to due to will result in enforcement and penalties per Sec. 14-58. 
(h)	The specimen tree recompense fee is computed as follows: 
1.	Specimen trees outside the buildable limits and side setback (Ch. 27, Article II) area: Recompense fee = $240.00 per DBH inch x 1.5. 
2.	Specimen trees inside the buildable limits and side setback (Ch. 27, Article II) area: Recompense fee = $120.00 per DBH inch. 
3.	The number of inches subject to specimen recompense fee for a permitting lot shall not exceed 300 inches per acre. 
If specimen tree recompense owed equals or exceeds the quantity of the calculated maximum, the calculated maximum shall be owed in recompense. For example, the calculated maximum for a quarter-acre lot is 0.25 acre x 300" = 75". If the actual amount of specimen tree recompense owed is 100", this amount exceeds 75", and therefore, 75" recompense is owed. 
(i)	Champion trees. As defined in section 14-50, the proposed removal of a champion tree shall warrant a variance hearing with the Board of Appeals per [section] 14-56(b). The 50 percent or more buildable area exemption within this section does not apply to the proposed removal of a Champion tree. Alternative design concepts to preserve the tree must be presented to the city as part of the variance hearing. Champion trees are given the highest level of protection within the city and all site design, tree protection methods during construction, and prescriptive tree care options must be given due process and consideration. 
(j)	Trees of quality. As defined in section 14-50, a tree of quality will be eligible for preservation credits equal to specimen trees: one and one-half times DBH inches or canopy cover area. The entire structural root plate and at least 80 percent of the critical root zone (CRZ) must be protected to receive the additional preservation credit; A qualified professional must submit supplemental photographs and notes supporting their recommendation for any tree to be considered as a tree of quality. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2021-07-01, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022)
Sec. 14-53. Tree fund.
All tree fund money is used in various capacities for the preservation, replacement, and management of the city's urban forest. Tree funds may be used for: 
(1)	The purchase and installation of trees in parks, rights-of-way and other city owned or leased property; 
(2)	Maintenance of city trees; 
(3)	Promotion of a healthy urban forest; 
(4)	Ecological restoration projects; 
(5)	Operational costs for the city tree nursery and other operational costs. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022)
Sec. 14-54. Procedures and requirements.
(a)	Building permits and minor site permits.
(1)	The requirements for the tree survey and tree plan are provided in a comprehensive checklist format by the department. 
(2)	Per section 14-54(c)(1, 2) the issuance of a tree removal permit that meets the maximum live tree removal limit, which is two live trees per 18 months, will preclude all proposed live tree removals for any permit associated with the same property for an 18 month period from date of issuance of the tree removal permit. 
(3)	For the tree survey, trees must be identified by: 
a.	Species. 
b.	Level 2 health assessment on the condition of each tree (dead, poor, fair, good) by a qualified professional and all required photographic documentation. Level 2 Tree Assessments must be conducted within the last 50 days from the date of submittal to the City for review. 
c.	Diameter in inches measured at 4.5 feet above the soil line (cumulative diameter of all main stems for a multi-stem tree). 
d.	To-scale exact locations on lot or adjacent properties (boundary trees). 
e.	Each tree must be shown as a circle or dot symbol with a label indicating species and DBH. Species-unique symbol and key format is not permitted. 
(4)	For the tree plan, the following information must accurately reflect the tree survey and include: 
a.	Critical root zone (CRZ), which is 1.3 -foot radius for every diameter inch, shown by a circle around the center point of the trunk. 
b.	Structural root plate (SRP), which is 0.5-foot radius for every diameter inch. 
c.	Trees proposed to be removed; shown on plan with an 'X' overlaid on the tree symbol and listed on the tree calculation table. 
d.	Trees proposed to be preserved; shown on plan with tree protection fencing, CRZ impact percent, and listed on the tree calculation table. 
e.	Replacement trees to be planted, including specified caliper size, species/variety, quantity, and location and listed on the tree calculation table. 
f.	Tree protection area for all preserved trees including boundary trees, shown by designated line type on the plan. 
g.	Any tree requiring prescriptive treatments must be labeled accordingly. 
h.	Calculated critical root zone (CRZ) impact percentage for all preserved trees including boundary trees. 
i.	Tree Calculations 
1.	Density Required: at least 130 inches DBH per acre. 
2.	Specimen Tree Removal: Diameter inches are multiplied by 1.5. 
3.	A 1.5 multiplier may be credited to the diameter at breast height (DBH) of preserved trees and to caliper size for the planting of each replacement tree for select species identified on the Arborist Standards Document. This applies to trees of these species of any DBH. 
4.	Density surplus (preserved + replaced) over minimum may be applied to specimen tree inches owed 
j.	Required Notes: 
1.	Invasive vining vegetation, including English Ivy (Hedera helix), Chinese Wisteria (Wisteria sinensis), and Kudzu (Pueraria montana var. lobata), to be manually removed from all preserved trees. Sever vines at base of tree and manually excavate vine roots out of structural root plate area of tree. Avoid any damages to bark and roots of preserved trees. Severed aerial portions do not have to be removed from trunk and crown. 
*Note: This requirement does not apply to native vining species such as Cross-vine (Bignonia), Trumpet-creeper (Campsis), and Carolina jessamine (Gelsemium). 
2.	No machine trenching through Critical Root Zone. Hand-dig where silt fence (SD-1) crosses the Critical Root Zone of any tree. Root prune as needed according to ISA/ANSI professional standards. 
k.	Details for Tree Protection and Tree Planting per the Arborist Standards Document. Available as PDFs on the City of Brookhaven Community Development Standard Details webpage. 
(b)	Land Disturbance Permits (LDPs).
(1)	The requirements for the tree survey and tree plan are provided in comprehensive checklist format by the department; They are the same as what is required for Building Permits. 
(2)	Additional requirements are: 
a.	Frontage tree/street tree calculations 
b.	Parking lot tree calculations 
(c)	Tree removal permits.
(1)	The following are requirements for all proposed non-development tree removal within all single-dwelling detached land use properties of the city: 
a.	Tree Removal Permits issued by the City are required for all non-emergency tree removals. Emergency Tree Removal is defined in Section 14-50; 
b.	All trees 4 inches DBH or larger require a tree removal permit; 
c.	The removal of up to two (2) trees, other than specimen trees, every 18 months is permissible so long as the minimum tree density of 130 DBH inches per acre is maintained. . 
d.	The removal of trees that are assessed as poor or DDH by a qualified professional does not count against the permissible live tree removals associated with the property; Level 2 Tree Assessments must be conducted within the last 50 days from the date of submittal to the City for review. If an approved tree density reduction results in a minimum density deficit, all required tree replacements must be included in the permitted scope of work; 
e.	The removal of all DDH trees, as defined in Sec. 14-50, 4 DBH inches or greater requires a tree removal permit; 
f.	The following are required for a tree removal permit application: 
1.	A completed Tree Removal Application. Minimum site density must be verified and documented on the Tree Removal Application. 
2.	A site plan or property sketch that includes the location of trees proposed for removal, trees that will remain, and structures. 
3.	Clear photographs of the tree(s) proposed for removal and any relevant defects and conditions. 
4.	Documentation from a qualified professional when required. 
g.	The City approved and issued tree removal permit and the associated public notice sign must be present in physical form at least five days prior to and on the day or days in which approved tree removal is executed; the City issued public notice sign must be staked in a location in the property which is visible and legible from a street frontage. Additionally, the applicant shall mark each tree to be removed with flagging tape at the time of the sign posting. The five-day pre-posting requirement shall not apply to emergency tree removals as defined in section 14-50. 
h.	The issuance of a tree removal permit that meets the maximum live tree removal limit, which is two live trees per 18 months, will preclude all proposed live tree removals for any permit associated with the same property for an 18 month period from date of issuance of the tree removal permit. **The current language regarding the signed affidavit in Municode needs to be eliminated.** 
i.	More than two live tree removals within an 18-month period may be approved by and at the discretion the city arborist based on factors such as, but not limited to, lot size, remaining site density if the proposed removals are executed, remaining species, and sizes and conditions of remaining trees. 
(2)	The following are requirements for all proposed non-development tree removal within all properties that are not single-dwelling detached land use within the city: 
a.	Tree Removal Permits issued by the city are required for all non-emergency tree removals. Emergency tree removal is defined in Section 14-50; 
b.	All trees four inches DBH or larger require a tree removal permit; 
c.	The issuance of a tree removal permit that meets the maximum live tree removal limit for non-residential zoned properties, which is one live tree per 0.25 acre of the property's area per 18 months, will preclude all proposed live tree removals for any permit associated with the same property for an 18 month period from date of issuance of the tree removal permit. 
d.	The removal of trees that are assessed as hazardous (DDH) by a qualified professional does not count against the permissible live tree removals associated with the property; for assessed or likely DDH trees, a tree removal permit application must be submitted to the city for review; 
e.	All non-residential zoned properties shall perpetually comply with all requirements per sections 14-51(f)(2)(a) and 14-57(a) upon the completion of approved DDH and live tree removals. Replanting shall be a condition of approval and shall be performed if necessary to continue compliance after approved tree removals are executed. 
f.	The city approved and issued tree removal permit and the associated public notice sign must be present in physical form at least five days prior to and on the day or days in which approved tree removal is executed; the city issued public notice sign must be staked in a location in the property which is visible and legible from a frontage street. Additionally, the applicant shall mark each tree to be removed with flagging tape at the time of the sign posting. The five-day pre-posting requirement shall not apply to emergency tree removals as defined in section 14-50. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2021-07-01, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022; Ord. No. 2023-09-05, § I, 9-26-2023)
Sec. 14-55. Protection of trees during construction.
(a)	Trees identified to be preserved and counted toward the tree density requirements shall have temporary chain link or other metal fence, a minimum of five feet in height, installed exactly where it is located on the approved tree plan. Each panel of fencing is to be tightly bound to the adjacent panels and firmly stabilized at the base. A sign shall be placed on the fencing stating "Keep Out." This area is designated as the tree protection area, an area encompassing the critical root zone of a tree that shall remain in a pervious state and undisturbed. 
(b)	A two-inch layer of organic matter must be present over the critical root zone in tree protection areas. Utilizing fresh wood chips from approved tree removals on-site to provide a two-inch layer of protective organic matter is a permissible practice and is encouraged. 
(c)	Any form of encroachment into the tree protection area may result in a 'Stop Work' Order from the city. The encroachment and protection must be immediately corrected. If the level of encroachment has likely caused significant impact to the tree/s, as determined by a qualified professional, additional tree protection measures, including but not limited to root pruning, decompaction, and prescriptive soil treatments may also be required before the 'Stop Work' Order is lifted. Court summons as a violation of this section will be issued for prolonged, repeat, or severe forms of encroachment significantly compromising the health of a tree or trees. 
(d)	Trees identified to be preserved should be branch and root pruned according to ANSI A300 standards. This is only a requirement for trees that will likely have crown and/or root encroachment per the approved tree plan. 
(e)	Tree care prescriptions developed by a qualified professional will be required for any tree on the permitting property or boundary tree with 20 percent CRZ impact or greater proposed or at the discretion of the city arborist due to the intensive nature of proposed impact, including but not limited to any portion of a stormwater device, pool or spa, or construction exit encroaching within a CRZ. 
(f)	Boundary tree protection. A boundary tree is any tree located on a property with a critical root zone that extends into the soil of an adjacent property. 
(1)	The permittee shall provide a Boundary Tree Agreement (BTA) to the owner of the tree if proposed critical root zone impact is 20 percent or greater, or at the discretion of the City arborist, based on the intensive nature of proposed development activity within the critical root zone. This includes but is not limited to storm water devices, pools and spas, and construction exits. The permittee and boundary tree or joint-ownership boundary tree owner shall negotiate any items in a BTA in a good faith, civil, and reasonable manner. 
(2)	The boundary tree agreement must specify: 
a.	The exact tree or trees. 
b.	Proposed CRZ percent impact. 
c.	Protection of the entire Structural Root Plate. 
d.	Assumption of full liability for the protection of the tree. If the tree is proposed to have a CRZ impact of 20 percent or greater, a tree care prescription by a qualified professional must be offered to the owner of the trees. 
e.	Pursuant to (d) in this section, section 14-48(h), and Sec. 14-50 (tree pruning definition), specify that any necessary crown pruning for building height clearance will be conducted according to ANSI A300 standards. This includes never removing more than 25 percent of the live branches, never cutting a branch below the branch collar, never using spikes to ascend a tree (causing injury to the bark and vascular tissue), and avoidance of pruning scaffold (large) limbs all the way back to the main trunk of the tree wherever possible. If the permittee intends to conduct any level of pruning on a boundary tree, adherence to these guidelines shall be explicitly communicated in the boundary tree agreement. 
f.	Description or copy of any and all items negotiated between the permittee and the boundary tree or joint-ownership boundary tree owner. 
g.	Assumption of future removal and replacement costs if the tree fails or has begun to decline in health, as determined by a qualified professional. 
h.	Permittee must include this statement within the BTA when presented to the boundary tree or joint-ownership boundary tree owner - "Based on proposed impact or removal of your tree(s) or joint-ownership tree(s), the permittee is obligated by the City of Brookhaven to present a Boundary Tree Agreement (Sec. 14-55 (F)). You are under no obligation from the City of Brookhaven to sign this letter as presented to you by the permittee." 
i.	Permittee full name, phone number, email address, physical address, and signature. 
j.	Boundary tree/s owner full name, phone number, email address, physical address, and signature. 
(3)	Permittees associated with land disturbance activity shall not be permitted to remove or destroy trees that are not located on the permitting property; without having met all requirements within section 14-55(f)(1—2). 
(4)	The boundary tree or joint-ownership boundary tree owner shall commence good faith negotiations of a proposed boundary tree agreement with the permittee within 60 days of initial contact. 
(g)	Final landscaping and stabilization. 
(1)	Per section 14-48(k), no grading, land disturbance, soil compaction, or construction activity of any kind within the designated tree protection area is permitted. This includes the time during which the city land development inspector allows for all erosion control measures to be removed from the site for final landscaping and stabilization. 
(2)	The tree protection fence must remain in place during final landscaping and stabilization and will not be permitted for removal from site until the site final inspection with the city land development inspector is passed. 
(3)	The only activity associated with land development that is permitted within the tree protection area is: 
a.	All activity associated with the control and removal of invasive vegetation; 
b.	The application of mulch, which is not to exceed a depth of four inches. 
Per section 14-50, Mulch is an organic material spread around the base of a plant or on a plant bed to enrich and insulate the soil. Mulch should never make contact with a tree above the root collar. 
Acceptable types of mulch include Pine Straw, Shredded Hardwood, Wood Chips, Bark Chips, or Leaf Litter. Synthetic or artificial mulches and artificially dyed mulches are not permitted for new mulch applications to preserved and replaced trees. 
(h)	Survivorship of preserved and planted trees. 
(1)	For all permitted projects involving land disturbance, all trees shown to be preserved or planted on the site plan approved by the city must remain alive and healthy. Any subject tree that dies or exhibits signs of decline or failure within five years of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or passing of the site final inspection must be removed and replaced by the permittee. Failure to remove and replace a subject tree or trees may result in a code violation and denial or holds on any other permitted projects until the subject trees are removed and replaced or an alternative resolution is made with the owner of the subject tree or trees. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2021-07-01, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022; Ord. No. 2023-02-01, § I, 2-15-2023; Ord. No. 2023-09-05, § I, 9-26-2023)
Sec. 14-56. Variances.
(a)	Administrative variances. 
(1)	A permittee may request an administrative variance for a reduction of setback distance to be reviewed by the director. These variance requests may be considered if the variance would reduce potential impact to a tree where it may be given a reasonable chance of survival. Front, side, and rear yard setbacks, and parking requirements may be reduced up to 25 percent by the city arborist and the director in order to preserve existing specimen trees. Appropriate conditions to said administrative variances shall be imposed so as to ensure the continued health of said trees following the granting of such variances, including mandatory replacement requirements. Administrative variances shall be considered and decided consistent with procedures and criteria as set forth within the zoning ordinance. 
(2)	Vegetated Stormwater Control Measure (SCM) which includes trees may count toward the tree density requirement; SCM must be reviewed and approved by city stormwater engineer; 
(3)	Pervious buffer restoration. For trees or tree stands within a city stream or other pervious buffer with a significant presence of invasive vegetation, density credit may be applied to all approved trees within the area where all invasive vegetation is sufficiently controlled. The area of control must be the entire CRZ of all trees plus ten feet in all directions where applicable. If there is an insignificant presence of native understory vegetation, the understory must be replanted with an approved plant list of native trees and shrubs after control of invasive vegetation is verified by the city. The understory plant material does not have to meet the tree replacement caliper minimum of two inches (2.0"). Pervious buffer restoration plans will be assessed by the city arborist on a case by case basis. Information on existing invasive and native understory vegetation must be provided by a qualified professional and be considered in the restoration plan; all approved work must be executed under the supervision of a qualified professional. 
a.	No mechanical or chemical damages or soil compaction may be incurred to approved trees as part of measures taken to control the invasive vegetation; 
b.	All native understory vegetation must be reasonably preserved; all topsoil and leaf litter must be reasonably preserved; 
c.	Herbicide application to woody invasive plant species must be targeted on fresh-cut stumps or suckering stems from stumps; broadcast herbicide application to woody invasive plants is not permitted; 
d.	In no case will this special consideration eliminate the frontage plantable area requirements (Section 14-51(f)). 
(4)	Tree stand restoration. For trees or tree stands on private property in non-buffer areas with a significant presence of invasive vegetation, all native woody species 0.5 caliper inches or greater may count towards density credit. All invasive vegetation must be sufficiently controlled. The area of control must be the entire CRZ of all trees plus ten feet in all directions where applicable. If there is an insignificant presence of native understory vegetation, the understory must be replanted with an approved plant list of native trees and shrubs after control of invasive vegetation is verified by the city. The understory plant material does not have to meet the tree replacement caliper minimum of two inches (2.0"). Tree stand restoration plans will be assessed by the city arborist on a case by case basis. Information on existing invasive and native understory vegetation must be provided by a qualified professional and be considered in the restoration plan; all approved work must be executed under the supervision of a qualified professional. 
a.	No mechanical or chemical damages or soil compaction may be incurred to approved trees as part of measures taken to control the invasive vegetation; 
b.	All native understory vegetation must be reasonably preserved; all topsoil and leaf litter must be reasonably preserved; 
c.	Herbicide application to woody invasive plant species must be targeted on fresh-cut stumps or suckering stems from stumps; broadcast herbicide application to woody invasive plants is not permitted; 
d.	In no case will this special consideration eliminate the frontage plantable area requirements (Section 14-51(f)). 
(b)	Variances. The board of appeals shall hear and decide applications for variances for the removal of a specimen tree that is located outside of the buildable area and side setback area. Where the cumulative critical root zone of existing specimen trees covers more than 50 percent of the buildable area of a lot, a variance shall not be required. The provisions of Chapter 27, Article X, Division 6 shall apply with regard to this section. No such special exception for the removal of a specimen tree shall be granted by the board of appeals unless the applicant has demonstrated, and the board of appeals has found, that the property has no economic value absent the grant of the special exception. In making this determination, the board of appeals shall consider the following factors: 
(1)	Value of the trees in question, considering their age, size, health, and significance. 
(2)	The current level of expected economic return on the property. 
(3)	The marketability of the property. 
(4)	The feasibility of alternate design or uses; 
(5)	Value paid for the property; 
(6)	The due diligence performed on the project before purchase to include tree surveys, ordinance review, and design review to minimize impact on specimen trees; and 
(7)	An opinion by a person qualified to render real property evaluations of a reasonable expected economic return on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2021-07-01, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022)
Sec. 14-57. Other land development tree requirements.
(a)	Parking lot trees.
(1)	Any redevelopment project that results in the construction of a new surface parking lot or removal and replacement of 50 percent or more of an existing parking lot, other than routine maintenance of the parking lot surface, shall be subject to the requirements of this section; 
(2)	Parking areas containing eight (8) or more off-street parking spaces on any single lot shall contain parking lot trees. 
(3)	There shall be a minimum of one overstory tree for every eight parking spaces included in the required landscaped areas (i.e., peninsula, island, or median island); 
(4)	Trees preserved along the perimeter of the parking lot may count as parking lot trees so long as at least one-quarter (25 percent) of the crown of the tree/s extends over at least two parking spaces; 
(5)	Parking lot tree islands or peninsulas shall terminate each row of parking and shall be a minimum of eight feet wide. Interior islands shall be a minimum of eight feet wide in all dimensions. Tree islands shall be backfilled to a minimum depth of two feet of suitable soil as specified in the Arborist Standards Document (Tree Planting Detail and Soil Quality Section); 
(6)	A densely-spaced vegetative ground cover planting is required for all parking lot island and peninsula trees. Individual ground cover plants shall be planted at a spacing of no more than one foot on center and must cover the entire pervious area (for the smallest dimension of eight x eight feet) or a minimum of six radial feet in all directions from the tree (for any larger sized island or peninsula). The Arborist Standards Documents lists preferred ground cover species to meet this requirement. 
(7)	Landscape strips required for overlay street trees must also be a minimum of eight feet wide; 
(8)	The Arborist Standards Document provides the approved list of overstory trees for parking lots. 
(b)	Buffers.
(1)	During authorized land-disturbing activities, all buffers shall be clearly demarcated on all development plans and protected during construction in accordance with best management practices or as required by the city arborist; 
(2)	Protection of and activity within required stream buffers shall comply with all current state and local guidelines; 
(3)	Disturbance or encroachments of buffers are not permitted. This includes, but is not limited to, ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities and any associated easements except that necessary utility access and crossings may encroach into the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical; this does not include measures taken under the supervision of a qualified professional and approved by the city arborist to control invasive vegetation and make ecological restorations (Section 14-51(h)(2;3)). 
(c)	Root protection of trees in city right-of-way.
(1)	The Arborist Standards Document will provide construction details and material details for protective measures required for trees growing within the city right-of-way; these requirements will be applicable to conflicts with the critical root zone of existing right-of-way trees and land development activities proposed by the permittee associated with a privately owned property or land development measures required by the city, including but not limited to, the installation of sidewalks and curb replacement. 
(2)	These protective measures may include but are not limited to: 
a.	Root-bridging or 'floating' concrete or other impervious surfaces; 
b.	Installing root barrier devices to protect other infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022)
Sec. 14-58. Enforcement and penalties.
(a)	Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the director or a designee of the director to enforce this article. The director shall have the authority to, and the city arborist may recommend that, the director revoke, suspend or void any permit or suspend all work on a site or portion thereof in order to effect compliance with this section. 
(1)	Violation and penalty. Any violation of any of the provisions of this article by any person or entity shall be deemed an offense and upon conviction in municipal court such person or entity shall be subject to penalty as is provided in section 1-11. Each tree removed , killed, caused to decline, damaged, not protected, or improperly pruned in violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense and will be alleged and charged as such by the municipal court solicitor or director or a designee of the director. Upon conviction in municipal court, the owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this section exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. Any homeowner of record found in violation of any of the provisions of this article, shall be subject to penalty as is provided in section 1-11. Violations are attributable to the relevant agent of any applicable entity both as an agent of the entity and as an individual. 
(2)	Additional legal remedies. In addition to all other actions and penalties authorized in this section, the city attorney or his designee is authorized to proceed with abatement or any other appropriate judicial or administrative actions or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove any violation of this section. 
(3)	Any tree service contractor, landscaper, or green industry entity or agent or agents of the entity who is contracted to complete tree removals, pruning, or treatments of any kind who commits or assists in the commission of any violation of this section, shall be prohibited from proposing and performing any similar work, including but not limited to tree removals and pruning, within the City of Brookhaven until all penalties for the violation or violations are paid and the case or cases are resolved in the City of Brookhaven Municipal Court or any higher court to which the case or cases are assigned. This prohibition applies to the relevant agent of any applicable entity both as an agent of the entity and as an individual. 
(4)	Habitual violators. The owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this section exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation of this section, who does commit or assists in the commission of a violation or violations of this section on two or more separate dates or on two or more different properties within one calendar year, shall be considered a habitual violator of this section. Habitual violators shall be prohibited from proposing and performing tree-related work, including but not limited to tree removals and pruning, within the City of Brookhaven for a period of up to three calendar years form the date of the last violation. This prohibition applies to the relevant agent of any applicable entity both as an agent of the entity and as an individual. 
(5)	In the case of an unpermitted tree removal, the responding officer will record diameter measurements of the remaining stump if all other parts of the tree(s) have been removed from the site. The average of the diameter measurements of the stump shall be considered the DBH of the removed tree when considering determining specimen tree status of the removed tree and specimen recompense owed when applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021; Ord. No. 2021-07-01, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021; Ord. No. 2022-10-01, § I, 10-25-2022)
Secs. 14-59—14-77. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT
Sec. 14-78. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-construction stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. Proper management of post-construction stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. Additionally, the City of Brookhaven is required to comply with several state and federal laws, regulations and permits and the requirements of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District's regional water plan related to managing the water quantity, velocity, and quality of post-construction stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-79. Adoption and implementation of the GSMM; conflicts and inconsistencies.
(a)	In implementing this article, the City of Brookhaven shall use and require compliance with all relevant design standards, calculations, formulas, methods, and other guidance from the GSMM as well as all related appendices. 
(b)	This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other article, ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, including, but not limited to, any applicable stream buffers under state and local laws, and the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between any provision in the City of Brookhaven's MS4 permit and this article, the provision from the MS4 permit shall control. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between any provision of this article and the GSMM, the provision from this article shall control. In the event of any other conflict or inconsistency between any provision of this article and any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, the provision that is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(c)	If any provision of this article is invalidated by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of this article. 
(d)	Terms used in the article but not defined in this chapter shall be interpreted based on how such terms are defined and used in the GSMM and the City of Brookhaven's MS4 permit. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-80. Designation of administrator.
The city manager may from time to time appoint someone to administer and implement this article. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-81. Applicability criteria for stormwater management standards.
This article applies to the following activities: 
(1)	New development that creates or adds 5,000 square feet or greater of new impervious surface area or that involves land disturbing activity of one acre of land or greater. If the development adds between 1,000 square feet and 5,000 square feet, then only runoff reduction and water quality as per code section 14-83(4) is required and sections 14-83(5) thru (9) shall not apply; 
(2)	Redevelopment (excluding routine maintenance and exterior remodeling) that creates, adds, or replaces 5,000 square feet or greater of new impervious surface area or that involves land disturbing activity of one acre or more; 
(3)	New development and redevelopment if: 
a.	Such new development or redevelopment is part of a subdivision or other common plan of development, and 
b.	The sum of all associated impervious surface area or land disturbing activities that are being developed as part of such subdivision or other common plan of development meets or exceeds the threshold in (1) and (2) above; 
(4)	Any commercial or industrial new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is a hotspot land use as defined in this article; 
(5)	Linear transportation projects that exceed the threshold in (1) or (2) above; 
(6)	Increases the peak rate of runoff from the site by more than one cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency storm; and 
(7)	Land development activities within individual single family lots that are not part of a larger common plan of development that also includes stormwater management facilities for the larger common plan of development, and that involve the creation, addition, or replacement of at least 3,000 square feet of impervious cover, shall provide storage and controlled release of runoff volume equivalent to the "water quality volume" or "runoff reduction volume" for the site as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-82. Exemptions from stormwater management standards.
This article does not apply to the following activities: 
(1)	Land disturbing activity conducted by local, state, authority, or federal agencies, solely to respond to an emergency need to protect life, limb, or property or conduct emergency repairs; 
(2)	Land disturbing activity that consists solely of cutting a trench for utility work and related pavement replacement; 
(3)	Land disturbing activity conducted by local, state, authority, or federal agencies, whose sole purpose is to implement stormwater management or environmental restoration; 
(4)	Repairs to any stormwater management system deemed necessary by the administrator; 
(5)	Agricultural practices as described O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(5) within areas zoned for these activities with the exception of buildings or permanent structures that exceed the threshold in 14-81 (1) or (2); 
(6)	Silvicultural land management activities as described O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(6) within areas zoned for these activities with the exception of buildings or permanent structures that exceed the threshold in 14-81 (1) or (2); 
(7)	Installations or modifications to existing structures solely to implement Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements, including, but not limited to, elevator shafts, handicapped access ramps and parking, and enlarged entrances or exits; and 
(8)	Linear transportation projects being constructed by City of Brookhaven to the extent the administrator determines that the stormwater management standards may be infeasible to apply, all or in part, for any portion of the linear transportation project. For this exemption to apply, an infeasibility report that is compliant with the City of Brookhaven linear feasibility program shall first be submitted to the administrator that contains adequate documentation to support the evaluation for the applicable portion(s) and any resulting infeasibility determination, if any, by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-83. Stormwater management standards.
Subject to the applicability criteria in section 14-81 and exemptions in section 14-82, the following stormwater management standards apply. Additional details for each standard can be found in the GSMM section 2.2.2.2 
(1)	Design of stormwater management system. The design of the stormwater management system shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of the GSMM as directed by the administrator. Any design which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(2)	Natural resources inventory. Site reconnaissance and surveying techniques shall be used to complete a thorough assessment of existing natural resources, both terrestrial and aquatic, found on the site. Resources to be identified, mapped, and shown on the Stormwater Management Plan, shall include, at a minimum (as applicable): 
a.	Topography (minimum of two-foot contours) and steep slopes (i.e., areas with slopes greater than 15 percent), 
b.	Natural drainage divides and patterns, 
c.	Natural drainage features (e.g., swales, basins, depressional areas), 
d.	Natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers, drinking water wellhead protection areas and river corridors, 
e.	Predominant soils (including erodible soils and karst areas), and 
f.	Existing predominant vegetation including trees, high quality habitat and other existing vegetation. 
(3)	Better site design practices for stormwater management. Stormwater management plans shall preserve the natural drainage and natural treatment systems and reduce the generation of additional stormwater runoff and pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. Additional details can be found in the GSMM section 2.3. 
(4)	Stormwater runoff quality/reduction. Stormwater runoff quality/reduction shall be provided by using the following: 
a.	For development with a stormwater management plan submitted before December 6, 2020, the applicant may choose either 1. runoff reduction or 2. water quality. 
b.	For development with a stormwater management plan submitted on or after December 6, 2020, the applicant shall choose runoff reduction and additional water quality shall not be required. To the extent 1. runoff reduction has been determined to be infeasible for all or a portion of the site using the practicability policy, then 2. water quality shall apply for the remaining runoff from a 1.2 inch rainfall event and must be treated to remove at least 80 percent of the calculated average annual post-development total suspended solids (TSS) load or equivalent as defined in the GSMM. 
1.	Runoff reduction. The stormwater management system shall be designed to retain the first 1.2-inch of rainfall on the site using runoff reduction methods, to the maximum extent practicable. 
2.	Water quality. The stormwater management system shall be designed to remove at least 80 percent of the calculated average annual post-development total suspended solids (TSS) load or equivalent as defined in the GSMM for runoff from a 1.2-inch rainfall event. 
c.	If a site is determined to be a hotspot as detailed in section 14-81, the City of Brookhaven may require the use of specific or additional components for the stormwater management system to address pollutants of concern generated by that site. 
(5)	Stream channel protection. Stream channel protection shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.	Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
b.	Erosion prevention measures, such as energy dissipation and velocity control; and 
c.	Preservation of any applicable stream buffer. 
(6)	Overbank flood protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(7)	The live detention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 100-year frequency rainfall as published in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The detention system required shall be necessary to handle the runoff of a 100-year rainfall, for any and all durations from the post-development, with a release rate that does not exceed the pre-development release rate during the same duration storm. Detention control structures and other drainage improvements shall be located and designed to prevent erosion damage to adjacent property owners. 
(8)	Downstream analysis. Due to peak flow timing and runoff volume effects, some structural components of the stormwater management system fail to reduce discharge peaks to pre-development levels downstream from the site. A downstream peak flow analysis shall be provided to the point in the watershed downstream of the site or the stormwater management system where the area of the site comprises ten percent of the total drainage area in accordance with section 3.1.9 of the GSMM. This is to help ensure that there are minimal downstream impacts from development on the site. The downstream analysis may result in the need to resize structural components of the stormwater management system. 
(9)	Stormwater management system inspection and maintenance. The components of the stormwater management system that will not be dedicated to and accepted by the City of Brookhaven, including all drainage facilities, best management practices, credited conservation spaces, and conveyance systems, shall have an inspection and maintenance agreement to ensure that they continue to function as designed. All new development and redevelopment sites are to prepare a comprehensive inspection and maintenance agreement for the on-site stormwater management system. This plan shall be written in accordance with the requirements in section 14-92. 
(10)	Discharge velocities from detention facilities shall be reduced to provide a non-erosive velocity flow from a structure, channel, or other control measure as set forth in the approved state stormwater management manual. 
(11)	The drainage system from a proposed development must discharge into an outfall that has adequate capacity to accommodate the runoff from the development. If the connecting downstream system is not able to accommodate the allowable design flows from the site, then the design engineer must design drainage facilities with the capacity to over-detain flows so they can be accommodated by the existing downstream conveyance structures whereby allowing the existing downstream system to operate correctly. If downstream easements are needed to extend the drainage system to an adequate outfall, the developer shall obtain these easements. 
(12)	The following requirements shall apply to the installation, development and maintenance of all stormwater and sedimentation control facilities designed for temporary storage of stormwater runoff: 
a.	Permanent fencing at least four feet in height shall be required around all facilities having a temporary water storage depth of greater than four feet or those designated by the board of health as constituting a public health hazard. 
b.	This fencing shall be designed, installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment into the facility. Fencing shall be established on the outside edge of a facility. The fence shall include a gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. The gate shall be placed in a manner such that the gate does not obstruct reasonable access or become obstructive. The community development director may waive fencing in nonresidential areas where a pond is more than 500 feet from a residential district and in residential districts when detention is provided in natural areas such as stream channels and fencing in the opinion of the community development director would damage the environment or affect stream flow. 
c.	The access easement to the facility shall not have a profile slope steeper than 33 percent and a cross slope of no more than ten percent. The elevation of the maintenance easement around the facility shall be established at the top of the dam or wall elevation and be constructed with a cross slope of no more than ten percent to the drainage facility. Fencing that complies with the requirement of subsection b. of this section shall be constructed on the outside edge of the maintenance easement. Gates that comply with the requirements of subsection (12)b of this section shall be constructed on each maintenance easement. 
d.	Detention and sedimentation control facilities shall not be placed in any of the following: 
1.	Transitional buffer zones as defined by chapter 27. 
2.	Floodplains. 
3.	Wetlands. 
4.	Stream buffer zones. 
5.	State buffer zones. 
e.	Perforated standpipes or a French drain, in accordance with published design standards available from the community development director, or other methods which will achieve equal performance to prevent standing water and inadequate drainage shall be installed within all the detention and sedimentation control facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020; Ord. No. 2021-02-03, § I(Attch.), 2-23-2021)
Sec. 14-84. Pre-submittal meeting, stormwater concept plan, and stormwater management plan requirements.
(a)	Before a land development permit application is submitted, an applicant may request a pre-submittal meeting with the City of Brookhaven. The pre-submittal meeting should take place based on an early step in the development process such as before site analysis and inventory (GSMM section 2.4.2.4) or the stormwater concept plan (GSMM section 2.4.2.5). The purpose of the pre-submittal meeting is to discuss opportunities, constraints, and ideas for the stormwater management system before formal site design engineering. To the extent applicable, local and regional watershed plans, greenspace plans, trails and greenway plans, and other resource protection plans should be consulted in the pre; Ord. No. 2023-12-03, § I, 12-6-2023; Ord. No. 2023-12-03, § I, 12-6-2023; Ord. No. 2023-12-03, § I, 12-6-2023-submittal meeting. Applicants must request a pre-submittal meeting with the City of Brookhaven when applying for a determination of infeasibility through the practicability policy. 
(b)	The stormwater concept plan shall be prepared using the minimum following steps: 
(1)	Develop the site layout using better site design techniques, as applicable (GSMM section 2.3). 
(2)	Calculate preliminary estimates of the unified stormwater sizing criteria requirements for stormwater runoff quality/reduction, channel protection, overbank flooding protection and extreme flood protection (GSMM section 2.2). 
(3)	Perform screening and preliminary selection of appropriate best management practices and identification of potential siting locations (GSMM section 4.1). 
(c)	The stormwater concept plan shall contain: 
(1)	Common address and legal description of the site, 
(2)	Vicinity map, and 
(3)	Existing conditions and proposed site layout mapping and plans (recommended scale of one inch equals 50 feet), which illustrate at a minimum: 
a.	Existing and proposed topography (minimum of two-foot contours), 
b.	Perennial and intermittent streams, 
c.	Mapping of predominant soils from USDA soil surveys, 
d.	Boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading, 
e.	Location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.), 
f.	Location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces, 
g.	Existing and proposed utilities (e.g., water, sewer, gas, electric) and easements, 
h.	Preliminary estimates of unified stormwater sizing criteria requirements, 
i.	Preliminary selection and location, size, and limits of disturbance of proposed BMPs, 
j.	Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains, 
k.	Flow paths, 
l.	Location of the boundaries of the base flood floodplain, future- conditions floodplain, and the floodway (as applicable) and relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainage, and 
m.	Preliminary location and dimensions of proposed channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(d)	Landscape irrigation system efficiency requirements. The requirement in this section apply to all new landscape irrigation systems connected to the public water system except those (a) used for agricultural operations as defined in the O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, (b) used for golf courses, and (c) dependent upon a nonpublic water source. Nothing in this Code or this Section is intended to require that landscape irrigation systems must be installed at all premises. The landscape irrigation efficiency requirements in this Section apply only when someone voluntarily chooses or is otherwise required by some requirement beyond this Code, to install a landscape irrigation system on premises. 
(1)	Specific definitions. 
Flow sensor. An inline device in a landscape irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. 
Lawn or landscape irrigation system.An assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution of water to irrigate landscapes such as ground cover, trees, shrubs, and other plants. lawn and landscape irrigation system refer to the same system.
Master shut-off valve. An automatic valve such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) installed as part of the landscape irrigation system capable of being automatically closed by the watersense controller. when this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the landscape irrigation system. 
Pressure regulating device. A device designed to maintain pressure within the landscape irrigation system at the manufacturer's recommended operating pressure and that protects against sudden spikes or drops from the water source.
Rain sensor shut-off. An electric device that detects and measures rainfall amounts and overrides the cycle of a landscape irrigation system so as to turn off such system when a predetermined amount of rain has fallen. 
Watersense irrigation controller. Is a weather-based or soil moisture-based irrigation controller labeled under the u.s. environmental protection agency's watersense program, which includes standalone controllers, add-on devices, and plug-in devices that use current weather data as a basis for scheduling irrigation. 
Watersense spray sprinkler bodies. A sprinkler body with integral pressure regulation, generating optimal water spray and coverage labeled under the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Watersense Program. 
(2)	Avoiding water waste through design. All new landscape irrigation systems shall adhere to the following design standards: 
a.	Pop-up type sprinkler heads shall pop-up to a height above vegetation level of not less than four inches above the soil level when emitting water. 
b.	Pop-up spray heads or rotary sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent surfaces and must not be installed closer than four inches from impervious surfaces. 
c.	Areas less than ten feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or by other means that produces no overspray or runoff. 
d.	Narrow or irregular shaped landscaped areas, less than four feet in any direction across opposing boundaries shall not be irrigated by any irrigation emission device except sub-surface or low flow emitters with flow rates not to exceed 6.3 gallons per hour. 
(3)	Landscape irrigation system required components. All new landscape irrigation systems shall include the following components: 
a.	A rain sensor shut-off installed in an area that is unobstructed by trees, roof over hangs, or anything else that might block rain from triggering the rain sensor shutoff. 
b.	A master shut-off valve for each controller installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the water but downstream of the backflow prevention assembly. 
c.	Pressure-regulating devices such as valve pressure regulators, sprinkler head pressure regulators, inline pressure regulators, WaterSense spray sprinkler bodies, or other devices shall be installed as needed to achieve the manufacturer's recommended pressure range at the emission devices for optimal performance. 
d.	Except for landscape irrigation systems serving a single-family home, all other systems must also include: 
1.	A WaterSense irrigation controller; and 
2.	At least one flow sensor, which must be installed at or near the supply point of the landscape irrigation system and shall interface with the control system, that when connected to the WaterSense controller will detect and report high flow conditions to such controller and automatically shut master valves. The flow sensor serves to aid in detecting leaks or abnormal flow conditions by suspending irrigation. High flow conditions should be consistent with manufacturers' recommendations and specifications. 
(e)	The stormwater management plan shall contain the items listed in this part and be prepared under the direct supervisory control of either a registered professional engineer or a registered landscape architect licensed in the State of Georgia. Items (3), (4), (5), and (6) shall be sealed and signed by a registered Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. The overall site plan must be stamped by a design professional licensed in the State of Georgia for such purpose. (GSMM section 2.4.2.7) 
(1)	Natural resources inventory. 
(2)	Stormwater concept plan. 
(3)	Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. 
(4)	Post-development hydrologic analysis. 
(5)	Stormwater management system. 
(6)	Downstream analysis. 
(7)	Erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(8)	BMP landscaping plan. 
(9)	Inspection and maintenance agreement. 
(10)	Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. 
(11)	Determination of infeasibility (if applicable). 
(12)	Construction sequencing plan. 
(f)	For redevelopment and to the extent existing stormwater management structures are being used to meet stormwater management standards the following must also be included in the stormwater management plan for existing stormwater management structures: 
(1)	As-built drawings. 
(2)	Hydrology reports. 
(3)	Current inspection of existing stormwater management structures with deficiencies noted. 
(4)	BMP landscaping plans. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020; Ord. No. 2023-10-04, § I, 10-24-2023)
Sec. 14-85. Application fee.
The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the fee structure established by the City of Brookhaven, and payment shall be made before the issuance of any land disturbance permit or building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-86. Application procedures.
Land development applications are handled as part of the process to obtain the land disturbance permit pursuant to chapter 14 or building permit pursuant to chapter 7, as applicable. Before any person begins development on a site, the owner of the site shall first obtain approval in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)	File a land development application with the City of Brookhaven on the City of Brookhaven's form of application with the following supporting materials: 
a.	The stormwater management plan prepared in accordance with section 14-84 (d), 
b.	A certification that the development will be performed in accordance with the stormwater management plan once approved, 
c.	A preliminary determination of infeasibility, as applicable, prepared in accordance with the practicability policy, and 
d.	An acknowledgement that applicant has reviewed the City of Brookhaven's form of inspection and maintenance agreement and that applicant agrees to sign and record such inspection and maintenance agreement before the final inspection. 
(2)	The administrator shall inform the applicant whether the application and supporting materials are approved or disapproved. 
(3)	If the application or supporting materials are disapproved, the administrator shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same for the administrator to again consider and either approve or disapprove. 
(4)	If the application and supporting materials are approved, the City of Brookhaven may issue the associated land disturbance permit or building permit, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permits have been met. The stormwater management plan included in such applications becomes the approved stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-87. Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan.
All development shall be: 
(1)	Consistent with the approved stormwater management plan and all applicable land disturbance and building permits, and 
(2)	Conducted only within the area specified in the approved stormwater management plan. 
No changes may be made to an approved stormwater management plan without review and advanced written approval by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-88. Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction.
Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system during construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Brookhaven or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the City of Brookhaven. Inspections shall use the approved stormwater management plan and the construction sequencing plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)	The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)	Whether the stormwater management system is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)	Variations from the approved stormwater management plan; and 
(4)	Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-89. Final inspection; as-built drawings; delivery of inspection and maintenance agreement.
Upon completion of the development, the applicant is responsible for: 
(1)	Certifying that the stormwater management system is functioning properly and was constructed in conformance with the approved stormwater management plan and associated hydrologic analysis, 
(2)	Submitting as-built drawings showing the final design specifications for all components of the stormwater management system as certified by a professional engineer, 
(3)	Certifying that the landscaping is established and installed in conformance with the BMP landscaping plan, and 
(4)	Delivering to City of Brookhaven a signed inspection and maintenance agreement that has been recorded by the owner in the property record for all parcel(s) that make up the site. 
The required certification under part (1) shall include a certification of volume, or other performance test applicable to the type of stormwater management system component, to ensure each component is functioning as designed and built according to the design specifications in the approved stormwater management plan. This certification and the required performance tests shall be performed by a qualified person and submitted to the City of Brookhaven with the request for a final inspection. The City of Brookhaven shall perform a final inspection with applicant to confirm applicant has fulfilled these responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-90. Violations and enforcement.
Any violation of the approved stormwater management plan during construction, failure to submit as-built drawings, failure to submit a final BMP landscaping plan, or failure of the final inspection shall constitute and be addressed as violations of, or failures to comply with, the underlying land disturbance permit pursuant to chapter 14 or the underlying building permit pursuant to chapter 7. To address a violation of this article, the City of Brookhaven shall have all the powers and remedies that are available to it for other violations of building and land disturbance permits, including without limitation the right to issue notices and orders to ensure compliance, stop work orders, and penalties as set forth in the applicable ordinances for such permits. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-91. Maintenance by owner of stormwater management systems predating current GSMM.
For any stormwater management systems approved and built based on requirements predating the current GSMM and that is not otherwise subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement, such stormwater management systems shall be maintained by the owner so that the stormwater management systems perform as they were originally designed. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-92. Inspection and maintenance agreements.
(a)	The owner shall execute an inspection and maintenance agreement with the City of Brookhaven obligating the owner to inspect, clean, maintain, and repair the stormwater management system; including vegetation in the final BMP landscaping plan. The form of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall be the form provided by the City of Brookhaven. After the inspection and maintenance agreement has been signed by the owner and the City of Brookhaven, the owner shall promptly record such agreement at the owner's cost in the property record for all parcel(s) that make up the site. 
(b)	The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) serving as the point of contact for carrying out the owner's obligations under the inspection and maintenance agreement. The owner shall update the point of contact from time to time as needed and upon request by the City of Brookhaven. Upon any sale or transfer of the site, the new owner shall notify the City of Brookhaven in writing within 30 days of the name or official title of new person(s) serving as the point of contact for the new owner. Any failure of an owner to keep the point of contact up to date shall, following 30 days' notice, constitute a failure to maintain the stormwater management system. 
(c)	The inspection and maintenance agreement shall run with the land and bind all future successors-in-title of the site. If there is a future sale or transfer of only a portion of the site, then: 
(1)	The parties to such sale or transfer may enter into and record an assignment agreement designating the owner responsible for each portion of the site and associated obligations under the inspection and maintenance agreement. The parties shall record and provide written notice and a copy of such assignment agreement to the City of Brookhaven. 
(2)	In the absence of a recorded assignment agreement, all owners of the site shall be jointly and severally liable for all obligations under the inspection and maintenance agreement regardless of what portion of the site they own. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-93. Right of entry for maintenance inspections.
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City of Brookhaven's right of entry for maintenance inspections and other specified purposes. If a site was developed before the requirement to have an inspection and maintenance agreement or an inspection and maintenance agreement was for any reason not entered into, recorded, or has otherwise been invalidated or deemed insufficient, then the City of Brookhaven shall have the right to enter and make inspections pursuant to the City of Brookhaven's general provisions for property maintenance inspections pursuant to section 14-24. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Sec. 14-94. Owner's failure to maintain the stormwater management system.
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for what constitutes a failure to maintain a stormwater management system and the enforcement options available to City of Brookhaven. If a site was developed before the requirement to have an inspection and maintenance agreement or an inspection and maintenance agreement was for any reason not entered into, recorded, or has otherwise been invalidated or deemed insufficient, then: 
(1)	An owner's failure to maintain the stormwater management system so that it performs as it was originally designed shall constitute and be addressed as a violation of, or failure to comply with, owner's property maintenance obligations pursuant to section 14-24 and 
(2)	To address such a failure to maintain the stormwater management system, the City of Brookhaven shall have all the powers and remedies that are available to it for other violations of an owner's property maintenance obligations, including without limitation prosecution, penalties, abatement, and emergency measures. 
(Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), 9-8-2020)
Secs. 14-95—14-107. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. RESERVED
Secs. 14-108—14-147. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION
Sec. 14-148. Findings and purpose.
(a)	Findings. Whereas, the mayor and city council of city find that buffers and impervious setbacks adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)	Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)	Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)	Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)	Protecting and stabilizing stream channels and banks; 
(5)	Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)	Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)	Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)	Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)	Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)	Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(11)	Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of green space. 
(b)	Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Create buffer zones and impervious setbacks along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)	Minimize land development within such buffers and land disturbance within such impervious setbacks by establishing buffer and setback zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.2), 3-25-2014)
Sec. 14-149. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means the area defined in section 14-153(a)(1). 
Ephemeral stream means a stream that, under normal circumstances, has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which temporary runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan (i.e., the regulatory flood). 
Impervious cover means those areas, which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to land development. Impervious cover includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, parking lots, driveways, streets, roads, decks (other than elevated slatted decks), swimming pools, patio areas, paved storage areas, compacted gravel areas, artificial turf, awnings and any concrete or asphalt areas. 
Impervious setback means the setback area defined in section 14-153(a)(2). 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land in connection with the construction, paving and any installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot, parcel, tract or acreage shown as a unit on either the latest county tax assessment records or other area of land legally established by plat or subdivision. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development or land disturbance activity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 14-153(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon a parcel. Ephemeral streams are not considered state waters for the purpose of this article. 
Stream means any natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground, except that an ephemeral stream is not a stream. 
Stream channel means the confining cut of ground surface that contains the base flow of a stream and is identified at a point where the water flow has wrested the vegetation. 
Unusual circumstances means: 
(1)	The shape, topography or other physical conditions of the parcel prevents land development in a manner consistent with similar situated properties within the proximity of the parcel; 
(2)	Circumstances constituting force majeure; or 
(3)	Any rehabilitation or reconstruction by a parcel owner of an impervious cover existing within the buffer described in section 14-153(a)(1). 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Wrested vegetation means the point adjacent to the edge of the base flow of a stream or the water surface of a lake where vegetation has been moved or wrested as a result of normal stream flow or wave action. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.3), 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2021-07-02, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021; Ord. No. 2021-12-06, § I, 12-14-2021)
Sec. 14-150. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all land development and land disturbance activity on any parcel containing a stream protection area. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.4), 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2021-07-02, § I(Attch.), 7-27-2021)
Sec. 14-151. Grandfather provisions.
This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)	Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)	Land disturbance permits issued by the city pursuant to this Code prior to the effective date of this article and all ongoing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening, golf course maintenance, lawn maintenance and other land disturbance activities not requiring permits under this article or any other provision of the Code; provided, however, any new land development or land disturbance activities on such properties shall be subject to this article. 
(3)	Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)	Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved since December 28, 2000, by the city or the county except that such phased development activity must be submitted for approval within five years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(5)	Construction, reconstruction, replacement, or redevelopment of existing impervious areas located within any setback described in section 14-153(a)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.5), 3-25-2014)
Sec. 14-152. Exemptions.
The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any permit or any other activity proposed on a parcel. 
(1)	Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.	A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.	Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.	Intrusions necessary to provide access to a parcel; 
d.	Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.	Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.	Impervious public trails and paths, including appurtenances consistent with the use thereof, that are installed by or at the direction of the city; provided, however, mitigation measures to offset the effects of the proposed impervious public trail or path shall be required in connection with the development thereof; 
g.	Activities to restore and enhance stream channel and bank stability, vegetation, water quality or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used; or 
h.	The removal of dead, dying, diseased, or hazardous trees, provided, however, no grading or stump removal shall be conducted. 
(2)	Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the stream channel. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)	Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)	Within an easement of any utility existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)	Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the office of the community development director on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the community development director to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)	Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire parcel for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(7)	Projects defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(3) that would be considered minor land-disturbing activities that are exempt from the Georgia Soil and Sedimentation Act: 
"Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion." 
1.	After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the buffer requirements and the setback requirements stipulated herein shall apply to new subdivisions and site plans or any other construction, land development or land disturbances in the proximity of a stream, whether or not the stream is located within the parcel where the activity is proposed. 
2.	Any land development activity within a buffer or setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 14-153(b). Any land disturbance activity within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless an administrative variance is granted pursuant to section 14-153(c). The forgoing two sentences shall not be applicable where the activity described in either is otherwise exempt or grandfathered pursuant to section 14-151 or this section. 
3.	After the final stabilization of a site is achieved in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the state environmental protection division, a buffer or a setback may be thinned or trimmed with hand tools of vegetation by the owner of the parcel as long as sufficient protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural tree canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.6), 3-25-2014)
Sec. 14-153. Land development requirements.
(a)	Buffer and setback requirements. All land development and land disturbance activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both sides of the stream channel as measured from the point of wrested vegetation. 
(2)	An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. All permitted land disturbance activity shall be minimized within the setback. In allowing for such activity, the provision for retaining walls or other topographical enhancements to limit of the area of land disturbance activity within the setback, may be required and approved by the community development director as part of the administrative variance procedure in subsection (a)(2) of this section, subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(3)	No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)	Variance procedure; application. A variance from the prohibition of land development within the above buffer or setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	If, due to unusual circumstances, the strict adherence to the minimal buffer or setback requirements in this article would adversely affect the parcel owner, in a material manner, upon application by the parcel owner the city council or the board of appeals of the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder after the conduct of a public hearing and such variance includes conditions requiring mitigation measures to offset the effects of the proposed land development on the parcel; provided, however, a variance will not be considered when, following the adoption of this article, actions of any owner of a given parcel have created conditions of an unusual circumstance on that parcel. A variance granted for a land development activity shall only include the area within in the buffer or impervious setback necessary to alleviate the effect of an unusual circumstance. At a minimum, the mitigation for encroachment into the buffer or setback shall include: 
a.	The provision for stormwater management and water quality control measures pursuant to article IV of this chapter for 100 percent of the total existing and proposed impervious areas on the parcel; provided, however, in adopting such measures, the exemptions in article IV are not available for purposes of this section. The proper installation of the stormwater management and water quality measures shall be certified by a registered engineer prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final site inspection approval for the improvements contained within the parcel; and 
b.	The planting of one two and one-half-inch caliper tree of a similar type on the parcel, in addition to any other trees that are required to satisfy the landscape or tree ordinances of the city, for each tree having a diameter of eight inches or greater at breast height that is removed from the buffer or setback area pursuant to an approved variance under this article. In addition, at the discretion of the community development director, the parcel owner may be required to provide additional mitigation measures, including off-site mitigation measures in the same drainage basin, if the minimum on-site mitigation measures are not considered sufficient to compensate fully for the loss of water quality protection resulting from the encroachment into the buffer or setback. 
(2)	The city council as part of a concurrent variance application permitted pursuant to chapter 27 or the board of appeals of the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall notify by U.S. Mail, first class postage prepaid, all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject parcel that a variance pursuant to this article is being requested including the nature of the proposed application, hearing date, time, and location at least 15 days prior to the public hearing and shall post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing date, time, and location no less than 15 days and no more than 45 days from the date of the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the parcel as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. The community development director or the city engineer shall prepare and submit to the city council or board of appeals a technical analysis on the applicant's mitigation measures, alternative designs and explanations of why an alternative plan is not possible. The community development director or designated representative shall be present at any such variance hearing and the city council or board shall consider the staff analysis when granting any variance or relief from the requirements of this article. 
(c)	Variance procedures; application for an administrative variance. A variance from the prohibition of land disturbance within the above setback requirement may be granted by the community development director in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	The parcel owner shall make an application of the variance with the office of the community development director. 
(2)	The city shall: 
a.	Notify by U.S. Mail, first class postage prepaid, all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject parcel that a variance is being requested which notice shall include a description of the variance requested in the application and the mailing address and business telephone number of the community development director for the transmittal of comments within 15 days of the date of the notice; and 
b.	On the same date of such mailing, post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the mailing address and business telephone number of the community development director for the transmittal of comments within 15 days of the date of the sign posting. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the parcel as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
(3)	The community development director shall render a decision regarding the application no earlier than 15 days of the date of the parcel owner's notice required in subsection (b)(2) of this section and no later than 45 days from the date of such notice and in granting any such variance may require such conditions necessary to mitigate the effect of the land disturbance activity. 
(4)	An adverse decision by the community development director is appealable to the board of appeals by application for appeal thereto no later than 30 days from the date of the adverse decision. 
(5)	A variance granted for a land disturbance activity shall: 
a.	Only include the area within the impervious setback necessary to alleviate the effect of an unusual circumstance; and 
b.	Include mitigation measures that are at least as protective of the natural resources and environment in a manner no less than such as present as of the date of the variance request. 
(d)	Required submittals for any variance request.
(1)	A buffer or setback variance request shall include the following: 
a.	A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey, including those state waters, wetlands and floodplain boundaries located on adjacent parcels that lie within 75 feet of the boundaries of the subject parcel; 
b.	A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the parcel; 
c.	A site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land development or land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.	Documentation of the adverse, material hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.	At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, and includes an explanation of why such alternative plan is not feasible; 
f.	A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.	A stormwater management site plan; and 
h.	Proposed mitigation for the intrusion. 
(2)	The following will be considered in requests for a variance: 
a.	The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the parcel; 
b.	The locations of all streams on the parcel, including along parcel boundaries and within adjacent parcels; 
c.	The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.	Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.	The water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.	Whether the proposed mitigation compensates for the lost buffer or setback functions and otherwise maintains the function of the required buffer or setback at the same site where the impact will occur and provides at least the same protection of the water quality as provided by the natural features to be disturbed or removed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.7), 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2014-10-01, § 1, 10-28-2014; Ord. No. 2019-02-01, § I, 2-12-2019; Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 14-154. Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements.
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of federal, state or local law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health and welfare and the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.8), 3-25-2014)
Sec. 14-155. Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties.
Any permit application for a parcel requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)	A site plan showing: 
a.	The location of all streams on the parcel or on adjacent parcels within 75 feet of the boundaries of the subject parcel; 
b.	Limits of required buffers and setbacks on the parcel; 
c.	Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.	Delineation of existing impervious areas, forested and open areas in the buffer zone or setback; 
e.	Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and setback and of all proposed land disturbance within the setback; and 
f.	Tree save fencing at the limits of the proposed disturbance where the proposed disturbance is within or adjacent to the stream protection area; 
(2)	A written description of the need for all proposed land development within the buffer and setback and land disturbance with the setback; and 
(3)	Any other documentation that the city may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.9), 3-25-2014)
Sec. 14-156. Responsibility.
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its elected officials, officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. All permits issued by the city which do not comply with this article are ultra vires and the work permitted thereby is subject to both a stop work order and order to remediate the land disturbance so permitted without the imposition of any liability upon the city, its elected officials, officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.10), 3-25-2014)
Sec. 14-157. Inspection.
(a)	The city may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The holder of the permit shall assist the city in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development or land disturbance activities within the protection area. 
(b)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative or agent while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.11), 3-25-2014)
Sec. 14-158. Violations, enforcement and penalties.
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)	Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the parcel. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.	The address or other description of the parcel upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.	A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)	Enforcement. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.	Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.	Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the parcel until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.	Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible party requiring such party to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Any violation of this article is punishable upon conviction according to the provisions of section 1-11. If the applicant or person responsible fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violation within the time frame prescribed, each day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.12), 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019; Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 14-159. Appeals and judicial review.
Appeals of decisions of the community development director or the board of appeals, as the case may be, are to be made pursuant to the sections 27-1661 and 27-1670, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-05, att.(14-44.13), 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 14-160—14-186. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. SUBDIVISIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 14-187. Policies and purposes.
(a)	Policies. The following policies apply to this article: 
(1)	It is declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided land in order to promote the orderly, planned, efficient, and economic development of the city. 
(2)	Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. 
(3)	It is intended that no subdivision be permitted in violation of the provisions, standards, and policy recommendations contained in the building code, zoning ordinance, the comprehensive plan, the character area study or other adopted planning documents, and official zoning map. 
(b)	Purposes. These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)	To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
(2)	To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(3)	To protect and conserve the value of land and the economic stability of all communities in the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the city through appropriate growth management techniques, including consideration of the timing and sequencing of development, consideration of infill development in existing neighborhoods and nonresidential areas with adequate public facilities. 
(4)	To guide public policy and both public and private actions in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and public services and support facilities. 
(5)	To provide for the safe and efficient circulation of traffic throughout the city, having particular regard to avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways and the pedestrians and bicycle traffic movements, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines. 
(6)	To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments. 
(7)	To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions of subdivided land. 
(8)	To ensure to the extent legally possible that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision. 
(9)	To protect and restore the highest quality of the city's air and water resources; to ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the city and the value of the land. 
(10)	To preserve the natural beauty, environment, and topography of the city and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-56); Ord. No. 2019-07-04, § I(Attch.), 7-23-2019)
Sec. 14-188. Public purpose.
Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable regulations to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to this city. A developer of land has the duty of compliance with the regulations set forth herein for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land to conform to the physical and economic development of the city and to the health, safety, and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-57))
Sec. 14-189. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. These regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted. Any conflict between provisions should be resolved in the way that best serves the purposes of the regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-58))
Sec. 14-190. Scope and applicability.
Except as provided in section 14-191, these regulations shall apply to all subdivision of land, or any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel, regardless of its existing and future use, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-59))
Sec. 14-191. Exemptions.
(a)	This article does not apply to the division or sale of land by judicial decree. 
(b)	For purposes of this article, the division of land into two lots shall be considered a subdivision but exempt from the plat review procedures provided that: 
(1)	Each proposed lot complies with the requirements of chapter 27 and all conditions of zoning; 
(2)	Each proposed lot fronts an existing paved public street, which contains the necessary right-of-way width required by this chapter; 
(3)	All such plats are drawn to final plat standards in this chapter; and 
(4)	The lot being divided is not a lot which resulted from a subdivision of property that was exempt from these regulations in the immediately preceding 24 months. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-60))
Sec. 14-192. Plats not to be recorded until approved; lots not to be sold in unapproved subdivision.
No person shall record any subdivision plat until it has been approved by the community development director or the director's designee, nor shall any lot be sold by reference to any subdivision plat whether recorded or not, if the plat is made after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, unless it shall have been approved by the community development director, or his designee. The recording of a plat shall be based on an approved plat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-61))
Sec. 14-193. Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy; extension of services.
No development permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations, nor shall the city have any obligation to extend services to any parcel created in violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-62))
Sec. 14-194. Power and duty of the city council to hear concurrent variances and the board of appeals to hear variances; criteria to be used in deciding variances, and appeals.
(a)	The city council or the board of appeals shall hear and decide applications for variances from the strict application of division 1 of this article VII, known as the subdivision regulations of city, where strict application of any regulation enacted in division 3 of this article VII would result in exceptional and undue hardship to the owner of such property. These regulations provide the minimum necessary requirements for subdivisions in city; thus, variances from the requirements of division 3 of this article VII shall be authorized only upon making all of the following findings: 
(1)	By reason of the shape or topographical conditions of a parcel of property which were not created by the owner or applicant, the strict application of division 3 of this article VII would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other similarly situated property owners in the same zoning district; 
(2)	By reason of the shape or topographical conditions of a parcel of property which were not created by the owner or applicant, there is no opportunity for development under any design configuration allowed by these subdivision regulations unless a variance is granted; 
(3)	The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute the grant of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other property owners in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; 
(4)	The requested variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; and 
(5)	The requested variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of chapter 27 or the official zoning map of the city. 
(b)	No variance shall be granted to: 
(1)	Allow any variance which conflicts with or changes any requirement enacted as a condition of zoning or of a special land use permit by the city council; 
(2)	Increase the density allowed on the property; or 
(3)	Vary the requirements set forth in sections 14-454 through 14-458. 
(c)	Applications for a variance may be submitted to the community development director, or his designee. At a minimum, the variance application must contain a full explanation of the reasons for the variance and must include a plat that shows the proposed subdivision designed without the variance and a plat that shows the proposed subdivision designed with the variance. 
(d)	Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the applications for variances for the preliminary plat shall be heard pursuant to chapter 27. All land development activity associated with a proposed variance from a preliminary plat shall cease until a final decision on the variance is made by the board of appeals. 
(e)	The board of appeals shall issue a final decision on a variance from the preliminary plat within 60 days after the first public hearing on the variance. If a final decision is not made on a subdivision plat variance in accordance with the time constraints set forth in this section, the variance shall stand disapproved. 
(f)	Appeals of variances shall be made by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. Any person or entity aggrieved by a variance decision may appeal such decision by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. A person shall be considered aggrieved for purposes of this subsection only if: 
(1)	Said person or the person's property was the subject of the action appealed from; or 
(2)	Said person has a substantial interest in the action appealed from that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-63); Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-63); Ord. No. 2019-02-01, § I, 2-12-2019; Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), adopted May 28, 2019, amended § 14-194 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Power and duty of the city council to hear concurrent variances and the zoning board of appeals to hear variances; criteria to be used in deciding variances, and appeals," to "Power and duty of the city council to hear concurrent variances and the board of appeals to hear variances; criteria to be used in deciding variances, and appeals," as set out herein. 
Sec. 14-195. Enforcement, violations, and penalties.
(a)	Generally. It shall be the duty of the community development director or his designee to enforce this chapter. 
(b)	Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction in municipal court shall be punished as is provided in section 1-11. Each violation of these regulations shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any structures, buildings, lots or parcels or parts thereof, where anything in violation of these regulations exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)	Enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings, including the issuance of stop work orders and actions in a court of law, may be taken by city in law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-64); Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Secs. 14-196—14-213. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE
Subdivision I. In General
Sec. 14-214. Application and preliminary plat required.
The owners of the land where the proposed development is to occur, or his authorized agent, shall file a preliminary plat with the community development department along with an application for approval. The application shall: 
(1)	Be made on forms prepared by the community development department; 
(2)	Be accompanied by minimum of four copies of the preliminary plat, which must be prepared by a registered civil engineer, surveyor, architect, or landscape architect, as described in these regulations and complying in all respects with these regulations; 
(3)	Be accompanied by an application fee in the amount set by the city council; and 
(4)	Include the name, address and telephone number of an agent who is authorized to receive all notices required by these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-89))
Sec. 14-215. Required information.
The following existing conditions shall be shown on a preliminary plat: 
(1)	Boundary lines. Perimeter boundary of the overall tract, bearings and distances, referred the legal point of beginning; 
(2)	Streets on or adjacent to tract. Name, right-of-way width, and location of streets on and adjacent to the tract, and any existing railroad, sidewalk, trail, or bike lane; 
(3)	Contour data. Topographic contour data at no more than two-foot elevation intervals. The source of this data shall be written on the plat. Existing contour data from the city geographic information system department may be used where available; 
(4)	Tree survey. A tree survey in compliance with article III of this chapter; 
(5)	Historic resources. If applicable, any building, structure, site or district identified as historic by the city historic preservation commission, the comprehensive plan, by listing on the state or national register of historic places, or by listing as a national historic landmark; 
(6)	Natural features on tract. Other conditions on the tract such as stream buffers, state waters, cemeteries, wetlands, existing structures, intermediate regional floodplain boundary, where available, rock outcroppings, and archeological resources; 
(7)	Geographical data. Numerical and graphic scales, north arrow, land lot and district numbers and lines, city and city names and limit lines; 
(8)	Prior subdivisions. Name and reference of any formerly recorded subdivision crossing any of the land shown on the plat; 
(9)	Zoning district. Show zoning district, case number and conditions of zoning; 
(10)	Permits. Show any special administrative permit number, special land use permit number, or board of appeals case number and conditions; 
(11)	Variances. Show any administrative variance approvals; 
(12)	Septic tanks. Show existing septic tank and drain field location or note absence; 
(13)	Sewers. Show size and location of sanitary sewer mains available; 
(14)	Sewer easements. Show a sanitary sewer easement with a minimum width of 15 feet of for all city maintained lines not within city right-of-way, unless otherwise required by water and sewer department; 
(15)	Water mains. Show size and location of water mains and fire hydrants; 
(16)	Water main easements. Show a water main easement with a minimum width of 15 feet for all city maintained lines not within right-of-way; 
(17)	IRF. Show on the plan whether FEMA or a city benchmark was used to establish IRF; also identify the location of the benchmark; 
(18)	Wetlands. Provide wetlands determination from U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
(19)	Receiving waters. Provide distance to and name of receiving waters; 
(20)	Certificate of conformity. Certification by the applicant that no lots platted are nonconforming or will result in any nonconforming lots; 
(21)	Bury pits. Show location of any existing inert waste bury pits; 
(22)	Seal. All sheets of plats must be sealed by a professional engineer, architect, surveyor, or landscape architect currently registered in the state; 
(23)	Vicinity map. Vicinity map at a scale of 400 feet to one inch showing the location of the tract with reference to surrounding properties, streets, municipal boundaries, and streams within 500 feet of the tract show zoning districts of adjoining property; 
(24)	Adjacent properties. Names of adjoining property owners and the zoning classification of adjacent properties; and 
(25)	Engineer. Name, address and phone of developer and engineer on plat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-90))
Sec. 14-216. Depiction of proposed physical layout.
The following proposed features shall be shown on the preliminary plat: 
(1)	Title. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, if known, with the name of the property owners and designers and the date of the plat; 
(2)	Street names. The name of all proposed streets; 
(3)	Rights-of-way. Street rights-of-way and widths indicated, including any necessary right-of-way required for improvements as shown on the thoroughfare plan; 
(4)	Sidewalks. All proposed sidewalk and bike lane locations; 
(5)	Lots. Lot lines, lot numbers, block letters, and the total number of proposed lots within the development; 
(6)	Dedications. Sites, if any, to be dedicated or reserved for common areas, public parks, open space, schools, playgrounds, multi-use trails, or other public uses, including streets, together with the purpose and the conditions or limitations of these dedications, if any; 
(7)	Yards. Minimum building setback lines as required under the yard requirements of chapter 27, zoning; 
(8)	Zoning conditions. All conditions of zoning and proposed deed restrictions shall be recited on the preliminary plat; 
(9)	Corner lots. Show that corner lots shall have an extra width of not less than 15 feet more than required for interior lots for the zoning district within which they are located; 
(10)	Transitional buffers. Show transitional buffers, if any, and any required screening fencing; 
(11)	BMPs. Show conceptual location of stormwater management and water quality BMP facilities on preliminary plat; 
(12)	IRF. Show proposed IRF contour, spot elevation, if available, and source; 
(13)	Covenants. Indicate whether the proposed subdivision will be subject to private covenants and whether a homeowner's association will be established; 
(14)	Sewer easements. Show a sanitary sewer easement with a minimum width of 15 feet for all publicly maintained lines not within city right-of-way; 
(15)	Water main easements. Show a water main easement with a minimum width of 15 feet for all publicly maintained lines not within right-of-way; 
(16)	Fire hydrants. Show new fire hydrants and firelines; 
(17)	Fencing. Show any required fencing around detention ponds, if required; and 
(18)	Electrical service. Show whether electrical service will be above ground or underground. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-91); Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 14-217. Scale.
Preliminary plats shall be prepared at an appropriate scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch. Maximum sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-92))
Sec. 14-218. Referral of preliminary plat for review.
(a)	Upon official acceptance of the application and the preliminary plat, the community development director shall initiate the review of the preliminary plat within the city departments to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(b)	The community development director, or his designee, shall approve the preliminary plat, deny approval of the preliminary plat, or recommend revisions to the preliminary plat within 90 days of the official acceptance of a complete application and preliminary plat. If at any time the community development director determines the application is incomplete, the community development director may reject the application and deny the approval of the preliminary plat. If the preliminary plat is denied, the community development director shall provide the reasons for denial in writing and such writing shall be given to the applicant with the denied plat. 
(c)	In the event the preliminary plat is denied because revisions are required, the applicant may submit a revised preliminary plat to the community development director. If the applicant fails to submit a revised preliminary plat within 180 days of filing the completed application, the applicant's application and preliminary plat shall be deemed withdrawn. If a revised preliminary plat is not approved within 180 days of filing the completed application, the preliminary plat shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-93))
Sec. 14-219. Standards for approval of preliminary plats; approved preliminary plats.
(a)	The community development department shall not approve a preliminary plat unless it is found that: 
(1)	Provisions have been made for a water supply system that is sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability, and quality for purposes of health, emergency, and adequate fire protection for the subdivision proposed; 
(2)	If a public sewage system is proposed, adequate provision has been made for such a system and, if other methods of sewage disposal are proposed, that such systems will comply with federal, state, and local laws and regulations; 
(3)	Adequate areas have been allocated within a subdivision to meet the regulations in this chapter for the long-term collection, management, and treatment of stormwater; 
(4)	The proposed subdivision is designed to comply with all code and ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to, the floodplain management ordinance, this article, and the stream buffer ordinance, located in articles IV and VIII of this chapter; 
(5)	No platting of lots within the subdivision will create any nonconforming lots or increase the nonconformity of existing nonconforming lots on property within or adjacent to the subdivision; however, this subsection shall not apply if the nonconforming status is due to a government condemnation or acquisition of private property for public use; 
(6)	If the subdivision abuts a state designed highway, all applicable statutory provisions are followed, including the rules of state department of transportation; 
(7)	The proposed subdivision is suitable for division and meets all the requirements of this chapter, the official zoning map, and all other standards and regulations adopted by all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of city and all other applicable laws from other, relevant jurisdictions; 
(8)	The proposed subdivision meets the policy recommendations of the comprehensive plan, the character area study, and other planning documents adopted by the city council; 
(9)	A properly issued certificate of appropriateness, when the subdivision or portions thereof lie within a designated historic area that required such a certificate as may be required by state law or this Code; 
(10)	Lot lines have been laid out so as to minimize crossing municipal or city boundaries; and 
(11)	All requirements of sections 14-214 and 14-215 have been fulfilled. 
(b)	The director of the community development or his designee may require the applicant to submit a site plan for any lot to demonstrate that the lot contains adequate buildable area that is suitable for the intended use. 
(c)	After review of the preliminary plat and related comments, and where, the preliminary plat conforms to all of the requirements of this chapter and chapter 27 of this Code, all conditions of zoning, and any other applicable city regulations or law, the community development director or his designee shall approve the preliminary plat. The following wording for approval shall be shown on the preliminary plat: 
This preliminary plat has been submitted to and approved by the community development department of the city, on this ________ day of ________/________/________. 


(d)	Within seven days after approval of the preliminary plat, the community development director or the director's designee shall post a notice of preliminary plat approval sign within the public right-of-way in front of or on the subject property for at least ten consecutive days. A land development permit may not be issued until the ten days have expired. This requirement shall not apply if a site plan for proposed preliminary plat was approved as a condition during a public hearing for a variance or a rezoning on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-94); Ord. No. 2019-07-04, § I(Attch.), 7-23-2019)
Sec. 14-220. Scope of approval approved preliminary plat; digital submission of preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall not constitute nor provide assurance of approval of the final plat, but is to be used as the development design for the subdivision and for the acquisition of a development permit as provided for in this Code. In addition to the paper copies, the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the development department in a digital format acceptable to the city, prior to or simultaneous with an application for a development permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-95))
Sec. 14-221. Expiration.
The preliminary plat shall expire 24 months from the date of the approval of the preliminary plat. If 51 percent of linear feet of total road in the entire development shown on the preliminary plat is complete at the expiration of 24 months from the date of the approval of the preliminary plat, then the community development director or the director's designee is authorized to grant a one-time, one-year extension of the approval of the preliminary plat. An expired preliminary plat is null and void and is of no effect. An expired preliminary plat may not be renewed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-96))
Sec. 14-222. Revised preliminary plat.
If the approved preliminary plat is amended or altered by the applicant, without an approved variance, after approval as a preliminary plat, then the applicant shall be required to re-submit the revised preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-97))
Sec. 14-223. Appeals.
The decision of the community development department or the director's designee to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat may be appealed by an aggrieved person or entity to the city council, on the form prescribed by the community development department. The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal, and shall issue a decision on the appeal within 60 days of the first hearing on the appeal. The decision of the community development department or the director's designee shall only be reversed upon a finding that the decision was arbitrary or based on an erroneous interpretation of a material fact or section of this chapter. Any aggrieved person from the decision of the city council may appeal by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. A person shall be considered aggrieved for purposes of this subsection only if: 
(1)	Said person or the person's property was the subject of the action appealed from; or 
(2)	Said person has a substantial interest in the action appealed from that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-98))
Secs. 14-224—14-254. Reserved.
Subdivision II. Final Plat
Sec. 14-255. Preparation.
The applicant shall have a registered surveyor prepare the final plat of the subdivision. An application for final plat approval may be made when a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision has been approved and construction of all required infrastructure is complete to ascertain its location as built. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-121))
Sec. 14-256. Filing; submission of final plat; fee.
The final plat and a fee in the amount established by the city council shall be filed with the city. In addition to paper copies, the final plat and as-built drawings shall also be submitted in a digital format acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-122))
Sec. 14-257. Bond.
If applicable, prior to the approval of the final plat, the applicant shall be required to present any bond, surety, letter of credit or other acceptable surety for public improvements required by this chapter in article VII, division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-123))
Sec. 14-258. Approval of a final plat.
(a)	The community development director or his designee shall approve or disapprove the final plat within 45 days of receiving the final plat. If the final plat is not approved or denied within 45 days of receipt, the final plat shall be approved automatically and the community development director shall acknowledge and certify such approval. If the final plat is denied, the community development director shall provide the reasons for denial in writing and such writing shall be given to the applicant with the denied plat. If the final plat is approved, the community development director shall place the following wording on the original as follows: 
This plat has been submitted to and accepted by the community development department for the city, and has been approved as required by state law and city codes as meeting all conditions precedent to recording in the superior court of this circuit. 
Dated this _____ day of ________/________/________, ________/________/________. 


(b)	Final plat acknowledgement and approval by the community development department shall constitute that approval, if any, required in order to file subdivision plats with the clerk of the superior court of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-124))
Sec. 14-259. Recording.
The applicant shall be required to file the approved final plat with the clerk of the superior court of the county and return a copy of the recorded plat to the community development director or the director's designee. No building permit for the subject property shall be issued without the receipt of the recorded plat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-125))
Sec. 14-260. Material specifications for drawing.
The final plat shall be composed of Mylar, or other durable, stable, and reproducible drafting medium approved by the community development director and must meet all provisions of the Georgia Plat Act. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-126))
Sec. 14-261. Scale.
Final plats shall be prepared at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch and shall have a maximum sheet size of not more than 24 inches in width and 36 inches in length, and a minimum sheet size of not less than 17 inches in width and 21 inches in length. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-127))
Sec. 14-262. Compliance with comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance.
(a)	The community development department shall not approve a final plat unless it is found that the proposed subdivision is suitable for division and that the final plat is in compliance with the policy recommendations of the comprehensive plan, the character area study, and other planning documents adopted by the city council. 
(b)	The final plat shall comply with the requirements of chapter 27 and all conditions of zoning for the subject property shall be shown in the upper right corner of the final plat with text height at a minimum of 0.18 inches for 24-inch by 36-inch sheet size and 0.09 inches for 17-inch by 21-inch sheet size. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-128); Ord. No. 2019-07-04, § I(Attch.), 7-23-2019)
Sec. 14-263. Required information.
The final plat shall show the following: 
(1)	Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearings and lengths of every right-of-way, street line, lot line, boundary line and building line, whether curved or straight; 
(2)	Tract boundary lines, land lot and district lines, city and city limit lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites; 
(3)	All dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest one hundredth of a foot and all angles accurate to the nearest second; 
(4)	Name and right-of-way width of each street including necessary right-of-way required for present or future widening of major, minor, collector, residential or other streets as shown on the thoroughfare plan; 
(5)	Sidewalk and bike path locations and width; 
(6)	House numbers will be assigned by the geographic information system department and placed on the final plat by the community development department; 
(7)	Title, north arrow, date, scale, land lot numbers and district numbers; 
(8)	Location, dimensions and purpose of easements and areas to be dedicated to public use, common areas or sites for other than residential use with notices stating their purpose and limitations; 
(9)	Intermediate regional floodplain contour line and setback line required by this chapter, state waters/state streams, wetlands, and required stream buffers; 
(10)	Water and sewer utility locations, and the location and type of permanent stormwater management facilities and water quality facilities; 
(11)	Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically; all lot and block numerals shall be kept in a uniform sequence on all plats and units of the subdivision; 
(12)	Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers; within each subdivision set one monument on two front corners of the property adjacent to existing rights-of-way on interior streets, or as otherwise approved by the development director; each monument shall be a minimum four-inch diameter disk by 24-inch-high concrete monument with brass caps set flush with finished grade; and 
(13)	Lots which shall not be built upon until detailed plans for grading and drainage have been approved by the development director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-129))
Sec. 14-264. Space for comments; certifications.
A blank space of 50 square inches shall be provided on the final plat to allow room for any stamps, notes, approval or denials by the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-130))
Sec. 14-265. Surveyor's and owner's acknowledgments.
The following wording for the engineer's [surveyor's] and owner's acknowledgments shall be shown and certified on the final plat: 
(1)	Surveyor's acknowledgment.
 In my opinion, this plat, drawn by me or under my supervision, was made from an actual survey, and is a correct representation of the land platted and has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law. 
________ R.L.S. No. ___ 
(2)	Owner's acknowledgment.
 I, ___________, the owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and for value received the sufficiency of which is acknowledged, do convey all streets indicated as public streets and rights-of-way, and further dedicate to the use of the public forever all alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements and public places hereon shown for the purposes and considerations herein expressed. In consideration of the approval of this development plan and other valuable considerations, the owner further releases and holds harmless city from any and all claims, damages or demands arising on account of the design, construction and maintenance of the property shown hereon; on account of the roads, fills, embankments, ditches, cross-drains, culverts, water mains, sewer lines, and bridges within the proposed rights-of-way and easements shown; and on account of backwater, the collection and discharge of surface water, or the changing of courses of streams. 
And further the owner warrants that he owns fee simple title to the property shown hereon and agrees that city shall not be liable to him, his heirs, successors or assigns for any claims or damages resulting from the construction or maintenance of cross-drain extensions, drives, structures, streets, culverts, curbs or sidewalks, the changing of courses of streams and rivers, flooding from natural creeks and rivers, surface waters and any other matter whatsoever. I further warrant that I have the right to sell and convey the land according to this plat and do bind myself and owners subsequent in title to defend by virtue of these present. 
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand this ________ day of ________/________/________, ________/________/________. 
(SEAL) 
(Owner) ___________ 


(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-131))
Sec. 14-266. Appeals.
The decision of the community development department or the director's designee to approve or disapprove the final plat may be appealed by an aggrieved person or entity to the city council, on the form prescribed by the community development department. The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal, and shall issue a decision on the appeal within 60 days of the first hearing on the appeal. The decision of the community development department or the director's designee shall only be reversed upon a finding that the decision was arbitrary or based on an erroneous interpretation of a material fact or section of this chapter. Any aggrieved person from the decision of the city council may appeal by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. A person shall be considered aggrieved for purposes of this section only if: 
(1)	Said person or the person's property was the subject of the action appealed from; or 
(2)	Said person has a substantial interest in the action appealed from that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-132))
Secs. 14-267—14-295. Reserved.
Subdivision III. Revised Final Plat
Sec. 14-296. Procedure.
(a)	When it becomes necessary to revise an original recorded final plat due to some error, required adjustment or desired adjustment, the applicant shall confer with the community development director. The applicant's surveyor shall make the necessary corrections on the original final plat or prepare a new tracing of that portion of the subdivision involved. The subdivision name, date and book and page number of the original recording shall be noted on the new plat. If the original final plat is not available, then any proposed revision to the final plat shall be considered a major change. 
(b)	A minor change is one that corrects a drafting or scrivener's error or is otherwise administrative in nature and does not affect how the subdivision will be developed or built. A major change is any other change, including changes that alter how the subdivision will be developed or built, such as, but not limited to, changing or moving lot lines, increasing or decreasing the number of lots, changing the location of any public facilities or utilities, and revising protective covenants applying to the property. 
(c)	If the community development director determines the change is minor, then the community development director approve the revised final plat, and shall file such revised plat with the clerk of superior court. 
(d)	If the community development director determines the change is major, the revised plat must proceed through the approval process for final plats described in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-146))
Sec. 14-297. Requirements of revised final plat.
The revised plat must meet the requirements of a final plat listed in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-147))
Sec. 14-298. Inclusion of required wording.
The revised plat shall show the following wording in black ink: 
This revised plat has been submitted to the community development department of city, and has been approved as required by state law and city codes as meeting all conditions precedent to recording in the superior court of this circuit. This plat is approved subject to any protective covenants shown hereon. 
Dated this _____ day of ________/________/________ 


(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-148))
Sec. 14-299. Original protective covenants not to be changed.
All revisions to original plats shall be bound by the protective covenants on the original final plat and a statement to that effect shall be noted in black ink on the revised plat unless noted otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-149))
Sec. 14-300. City may require additional data.
Other data which may be required in support of a revised final plat are: a final engineering design report on proposed revisions and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as may be required by city officials in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10-02, § 1(14-150))
Secs. 14-301—14-318. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. DESIGN STANDARDS
Subdivision I. In General
Sec. 14-319. Adequate public facilities.
The applicant shall submit sufficient information and data with the application on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate compliance with the following: 
(1)	Water. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a public water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. 
(2)	Wastewater. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. 
(3)	Stormwater management. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding as required under article IV. Stormwater quality management facilities shall be adequate as required by article IV of this chapter. City may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and or the construction of off-site drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed developments. 
(4)	Roads. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation, shall be properly related to the comprehensive plan, and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development. 
(5)	Extension policies. All public improvements and required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities, electric lines, and telecommunications lines shall be constructed through new development to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-166), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-320—14-341. Reserved.
Subdivision II. Streets
Sec. 14-342. Applicability; conformance to design and location.
(a)	The provisions of this part apply to streets in subdivisions and in other projects requiring a development or land disturbance permit from city. 
(b)	The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all subdivision streets shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and to the thoroughfare plan. The thoroughfare plan means the thoroughfare plan adopted by the county, as amended. New streets shall be designed and located with consideration of their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by the streets. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-181), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-343. Subdivisions bordering on or containing arterial streets, railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway right-of-way.
Where a subdivision borders on or contains an arterial street (major thoroughfares, and minor thoroughfares), a railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway right-of-way, the community development director or designee may require the following: 
(1)	Rear service alleys to facilitate traffic flow, safety and public services; 
(2)	Provision of one or a pair of smaller marginal access streets approximately parallel to and on each side of this right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land as park or open space and to provide for multipurpose trails. These distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations; or 
(3)	In the case of limited-access highways only, reverse frontage lots may be created with landscape buffers and a non-access reserve strip along the rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-185), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-344. Street spacing.
The right-of-way for new public streets or the minimum required easement/common area for new private streets must be located a minimum of 50 feet from any peripheral property line adjoining residentially zoned property, unless inter-parcel access is required. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-186), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-345. Street intersection spacing.
Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet as shown in the city standards for construction and design shall be prohibited in subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-187), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-346. Intersections—Right angles.
Street intersections in subdivisions shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable. No interior angle shall be less than 75 degrees. Intersections or more than two streets shall be designed according to the specific types illustrated in the city standards for construction and design. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-188), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-347. Same—Property line to be curved or mitered.
At each street intersection in a subdivision, the property line at each block corner shall either be mitered or rounded. A mitered property line shall be located on the interior chord of a convex curve or located 15 feet inside the tangent of a concave curve. A rounded property line shall be established with a curve of radius R varying with the interior angle as specified in the following table, unless sufficient data is presented to show that strict adherence to this requirement is impractical due to topographical or engineering considerations. 
Table of Intersection Returns 


(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-189), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-348. Traffic improvements, street improvements, curb cuts, visibility requirements, and private street construction standards.
(a)	Each building shall be located on a lot or parcel that abuts a public street or private street. Private streets shall only be allowed if the development seeking to have a private streets is ten acres or larger in size. The community development department shall have the authority to waive this minimum acreage requirement if all real property owners that abut the proposed private street agree to such waiver. 
(b)	Where this chapter measures minimum building setback lines and frontages, or imposes development standards in connection with, or with reference to public streets, such measurements or standards set forth in the district regulations and supplemental regulations of chapter 27, in this chapter or elsewhere in this Code shall apply similarly for property abutting a private street. Nothing in this article is intended to authorize any kind of development on a private street that would not be authorized where there was public right-of-way. 
(c)	Private streets within any zoning district shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this Code. Private streets within any district shall be assigned names and locations. The names of these streets shall be shown on plans required for the issuance of building and development permits as provided in this chapter and chapters 7 and 27. The geographical information services department shall approve all private street names and addresses, thereby avoiding conflicting names and addresses. 
(d)	Lots may front on a public street or private street constructed to the standards found in this chapter. 
(e)	Where sewer lines are constructed underneath a private street, the developer is required to grant an easement to the county or city for installation, maintenance and repair of such sewer lines. 
(f)	Private streets shall not be eligible for participation in the city's traffic calming program as provided for in chapter 17. 
(g)	Private streets shall not be eligible for participation in the city's residential sidewalk district program as provided for in chapter 23. 
(h)	Developers and property owners' associations shall ensure access to all private streets by emergency and law enforcement vehicles and shall ensure that private streets are constructed to allow access by all emergency vehicles and law enforcement vehicles. 
(i)	The use of private streets may not result in an increase in permitted density above that which would otherwise be permitted by the applicable district regulations. Density calculations shall be made based on a public street system and the preliminary plat that provides for a private street shall be density neutral. Additionally, a utility easement is not to be included in any plat as a part of an individual lot and thus such land that comprises the utility easements cannot be used to calculate the required minimum lot size, or minimum front yard size. 
(j)	Private streets shall comply with requirements for public streets found in this chapter and all other applicable sections of this Code. Private streets shall be surfaced with the same type of materials that are used by the city's department of public works for the surfacing and resurfacing of public streets or with materials that are as protective as those used by the city to surface and resurface streets so long as such alternative materials are approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-189.1), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-349. Approval to create a private street.
(a)	The community development department may authorize a private street when the applicant has submitted all required documentation as set forth herein and where the community development department finds that: 
(1)	The location of the proposed private streets will not adversely impact use of any existing surrounding public streets; 
(2)	The location of the proposed private street will not adversely impact adjacent existing communities or neighborhoods; 
(3)	The applicant has shown that there is the requisite legal mechanism for the maintenance of the proposed private streets; and 
(4)	The applicant has provided written evidence that the proposed private street system is acceptable to the city and county departments or divisions responsible for law enforcement, sanitation, transportation and fire and rescue. 
(b)	Street rights-of-way shall be owned by the mandatory homeowners' association as required by section 14-350. Street rights-of-way shall comply with all the requirements set forth in this Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in this chapter and in chapter 27. An access easement and a utility easement shall entirely overlay the rights-of-way and shall be dedicated to city for public use. All applicable setbacks, lot widths and lot areas shall be measured from the homeowner's association right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-189.2), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-350. Legal mechanism for maintenance of private streets; resurfacing fund.
(a)	Maintenance of private streets.
(1)	Each developer that chooses to include private streets within a condominium, as that term is defined by state law, or any other residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial or office development shall organize and establish a property owners' association prior to recording of the final plat. Membership in the property owners' association shall be mandatory for each original and successive purchaser of a lot, building or unit within the development. The property owners' association shall be organized so that it has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the private streets and required improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses. The declaration of covenants creating the property owners' association shall be recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the county and the recorded declaration of covenants and articles of incorporation creating the property owners' association shall provide that all private streets and associated improvements are owned by the property owners' association or are held in common by the property owners within the development. Said streets shall be properly maintained and insured with no liability or maintenance responsibilities accruing to the city. The recorded declaration of covenants and articles of association shall specifically require the property owners' association to repair and maintain each private street in the same manner as similar public streets are maintained by the city and such maintenance and repair shall be performed in compliance with all city standards and all applicable provisions of law. 
(2)	Prior to any final plat approval, the developer shall submit articles of incorporation, declaration of covenants and bylaws for the property owners' association to the community development department. Those documents must thereafter be reviewed and approved by the city attorney. 
(b)	Maintenance fund. The declaration of covenants and articles of association shall provide for a street maintenance fund the proceeds of which shall be used solely for the purpose of regular maintenance of the streets, whether for resurfacing or a similar purpose. For the purposes of further providing further assurance that city funds shall not be used for maintenance of private streets, the developer shall submit proof of deposit of 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by community development director or designee, in an interest bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. 
(c)	Maintenance bond. At the end of the 12-month maintenance period provided for in section 14-675, a developer must provide a maintenance bond renewable annually to cover the cost of maintenance and repair for any private streets within a subdivision. The bond shall be for an amount equal to 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or designee. The developer may avoid securing the maintenance bond set forth in this subsection if the developer submits proof to the community development department that 100 percent of the then-current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or designee, has been deposited in an interest-bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. If the developer chooses this alternative, the declarations of covenants and articles of association shall specifically require the property owners' association to continuously maintain 100 percent of the then-current estimate of resurfacing costs of the private streets in this maintenance fund. 
(d)	Assessment and liens. The property owners' association must be empowered to levy assessments against owners within the development for the payment of expenditures made by the association for maintenance of the private streets and other items set forth in subsection (a) of this section. At least 15 percent of all fees or assessments paid shall be set aside in the maintenance fund. Any unpaid assessments shall constitute a lien in favor of the property owners' association on the lot, building or unit of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-189.3), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-351. Inspection of private streets within nine months of approval of the final plat; failure to correct deficiencies.
(a)	Within nine months following approval of the final plat, the city's community development director or designee shall inspect the private streets to ensure compliance with all city standards and all applicable provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in law for public streets, curbs, sidewalks, signage and street lighting. The developer shall be notified of any deficiencies in writing and such deficiencies shall be corrected within 60 days of the written notice of deficiencies unless the city agrees to extension of that period in writing. 
(b)	Failure to correct the complete list of deficiencies shall be a violation of this section and shall subject the developer to prosecution for a code violation in the municipal court of city. Any person found to have violated this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 for each violation. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall continue any such violation. 
(c)	The community development director or designee shall deny the issuance of certificates of occupancy until all deficiencies have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-189.4), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-352. Abandonment of existing public streets.
(a)	Any abandonment of a public street by the city pursuant to this section must comply with the applicable requirements set forth in state law and this Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 32-7-2(b) and 32-7-4 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
(b)	A property owner may petition the governing authority to abandon an existing public street that abuts the owners' property. The petition must include documents that comply with all of the following requirements set forth in this section. 
(c)	The petition shall contain evidence that each abutting landowner to the public street seeks to have the street abandoned. 
(d)	The petition shall contain evidence that once abandoned pursuant to the requirements of state law, all property owners that abut the street agree that ownership of the street shall be placed in a property owners' association. The petition shall include evidence that 100 percent of all property owners in the property owners' association have agreed that the street at issue may become private and have agreed to maintain and exercise control over the private street as required by this article. 
(e)	The petition shall contain evidence that the property owners' association has the financial ability to maintain the street and associated improvements in perpetuity. 
(f)	The petition shall include evidence that the declaration of covenants and articles of association or other legal instruments creating the property owners' association provide or have been amended to provide that membership in the property owners' association shall be mandatory for each original and successive purchaser of a lot, building or unit on the street. 
(g)	The petition shall include evidence that the property owners' association shall be organized so that it has absolute legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the private streets and required improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses. 
(h)	The petition shall include evidence that the declaration of covenants creating the property owners' association shall be recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the county and the recorded declaration of covenants and articles of incorporation creating the property owners' association shall provide that all private streets and associated improvements are owned by the property owners' association or are held in common by the property owners within the development. Said streets shall be properly maintained and insured with no liability or maintenance responsibilities accruing to the city. 
(i)	The petition shall include evidence that the declaration of covenants and articles of association shall provide for a maintenance fund, the proceeds of which shall be used solely for the purpose of regular maintenance of the streets, whether for resurfacing or similar purpose. For the purposes of further providing further assurances that city funds shall not be used for maintenance of private streets, the property owners' association shall submit proof of a maintenance fund equal to 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or designee, in an interest bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. 
(j)	The petition shall include evidence that the property owners have a maintenance bond renewable annually in an amount equal to 50 percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the community development director or designee. 
(k)	The petition shall include evidence that the property owners' association is empowered to levy assessments against owners on the streets for the payment of expenditures made by the association for maintenance of the private streets and improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses and evidence that any unpaid assessments shall constitute a lien in favor of the property owners' association on the lot, building, or unit of the owner. At least 15 percent of all fees or assessments paid shall be set aside in the maintenance fund. 
(l)	The governing authority shall not consider a petition for abandonment unless it: 
(1)	Contains all of the evidence and documents required by this article and has been reviewed by community development department; 
(2)	Is supported by an analysis by public works department that shows that the street is no longer used by the public to the extent that it serves no substantial public purpose and that the public at large will benefit from its closure since the public will no longer be responsible for any costs to maintain and repair the street; and 
(3)	Is supported by an analysis by the community development department that shows that the abandonment of the street shall not negatively impact adjacent neighboring communities and the public at large. 
Deferral of a petition or failure to provide a recommendation by the community development department shall not prevent the governing authority from taking any and all appropriate action with respect to the petition identified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-189.5), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-353. Street classification and right-of-way width.
All streets shall be classified according to the table in this section. Street construction standards shall be no less than as follows, unless otherwise approved by the public works director: 


*Shoulder width not included, two foot paved shoulder width required for non-curbed roads (both sides) 
Paving Width = travel lanes + bike lanes 
Property Right-of-way = paving width + curb & gutter width + utility strip + bike lanes + other (median or shoulder) 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-190), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2018-04-03, § I, 4-24-2018)
Sec. 14-354. Improvements; right-of-way dedication.
(a)	All proposed new streets shall be designed and built according to one of the standards listed in section 14-353. 
(b)	Where a proposed subdivision involving new development or project requiring a land development permit has frontage on an existing public street, right-of-way shall be dedicated along that frontage so as to meet the standards of that street's classification. The right-of-way shall be improved wherever required as further provided in this section. For existing streets on which a proposed subdivision involving new development or project requiring a land development permit has frontage, the applicant shall: 
(1)	Dedicate a minimum of 50 percent of the required right-of-way width as measured from the centerline of the existing street right-of-way; 
(2)	Install all required sidewalks, street trees, streetlights, and place utilities according to the standards in section 14-353; and 
(3)	Provide a minimum of 50 percent of the roadway pavement required in section 14-353 and install it to the right-of-way centerline. 
(c)	Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements on the city zoning ordinance where the land is to be dedicated to the public in fee simple or an easement associated with the road is granted to city. 
(d)	Right-of-way dedication and road widening shall extend for the full length of road frontage of the property under development and shall conform the standards in these regulations. Flares at pavement ends may be required to extend beyond property under development. 
(e)	The public works director, after considering all related factors, may authorize deviations from this section as follows: 
(1)	Right-of-way dedication may be waived or modified if: 
a.	Existing use of property is not to be substantially changed as a result of proposed development or construction; 
b.	Existing government construction plans for the roadway indicate lesser right-of-way would be required for dedication; or 
c.	The adjoining frontage is developed and the predominate existing right-of-way meets city standards. 
(2)	Road improvements may be waived or modified if: 
a.	Existing use of property not to be substantially changed (i.e., traffic generation and ingress/egress would remain the same); 
b.	Governmental construction plans for the road indicate a pavement width less than city standards (only the planned pavement width shall be required); 
c.	No more than five percent of average daily traffic generation would occur between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays; 
d.	The existing road meets current city standards; or 
e.	Widening would create a hazard to traffic, pedestrians, or bicyclists along the thoroughfare. 
(3)	The applicant may, with written concurrence of the public works director or designee and the city attorney, provide payment to the city in lieu of road improvements when: 
a.	Road improvements by state or local action are scheduled within 24 months; 
b.	Existing utility companies' improvements are situated so as to require their removal or relocation before road improvements should be accomplished; 
c.	Improvements would be economically unfeasible or would cause unreasonable land development hardships because of topography, soils, bridges, grades, etc., and delay of improvements would not adversely impact the city's road system; and 
d.	Payment for road improvements shall be in accordance with a schedule adopted by the city council in January of each year and based on current street construction costs for the required section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-191), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2018-04-03, § I, 4-24-2018)
Sec. 14-355. Half streets.
Half streets are prohibited. The applicant shall be required to pave the full standard width of any existing unpaved public right-of-way or any proposed public street on which the proposed subdivision has frontage and access. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-192), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-356. Temporary dead-end streets.
Temporary dead-end streets may be platted, if recommended by the community development director or designee where the proposed subdivision adjoins property not yet subdivided or property that may be redevelopment. A temporary dead end street shall end in a temporary turn-around. The right-of-way of any temporary dead end street shall be carried to the boundary of the properties being subdivided. Street signs shall be posted stating: "No Exit—temporary dead-end street." 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-193), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-357. Permanent dead-end streets; cul-de-sac required.
(a)	Dead-end streets designed to be so permanently shall be provided with a cul-de-sac at the closed end and shall not exceed 1,200 feet. 
(b)	The minimum outside radius of a cul-de-sac on a public street shall be 40 feet, measured to the inside face of the outside curb. Cul-de-sacs may include a landscaped island at the center subject to approval of the director of public works, and the clear width of the paved roadway measured from the outside of the landscaped island to the inside face of the outside curb shall not be less than 24 feet. The radius of the right-of-way for the cul-de-sac shall not be less than 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-194), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-358. Alleys.
(a)	Alleys shall be required wherever topography or the presence of arterial roads or other features makes vehicular access from the front of the lot impractical or unsafe. Where the alley serves as the primary means of vehicular access to the lot, it shall be dedicated as a public right-of-way and built to the standards required in these regulations and this chapter. 
(b)	Alleys may be permitted as private streets providing secondary or service access and where the principal buildings have adequate access for emergency vehicles from a public street on their frontage. Private alleys may end in a turn-around. All alleys dedicated to the public shall provide a continuous connection between one or more public streets. Alleys shall be paved and constructed to the same standards as the connecting public streets except that: 
(1)	The paved width of an alley shall be not less than 12 feet; 
(2)	Alleys shall be constructed with flush curbs; 
(3)	Buildings shall be set back at least ten feet from the back of curb of an alley. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-195), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-359. Street grades.
Subdivision street grades shall not exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 


(1)	A 16 percent grade on local residential streets may be approved by the public works director or designee where a sight distance in feet of ten times the speed limit is maintained. An as-built street profile may be required. 
(2)	No street grade shall be less than one percent and no one percent grade shall be longer than 300 feet. 
(3)	Up to a 12 percent grade on alleys may be allowed, provided the community development director or designee approves any required drainage plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-196), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-360. Minimum horizontal curve radius.
Subdivision streets with design speeds of 20 miles per hour may not have a minimum centerline horizontal curve radius less than 90 feet. No other subdivision street shall have a horizontal curve radius less than 150 feet. Radius shall be measured from the centerline of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-197), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-361. Minimum sight distance.
All subdivision streets shall have a minimum sight distance of at least 200 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-198), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-362. Design of intersections.
Subdivision intersections shall not be designed in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard. A minimum of 150 feet clear sight distance in each direction from the intersection shall be provided. Where a subdivision street enters an existing major or minor arterial, a minimum of 250 feet sight distance in each direction shall be maintained. If, due to other restrictions, this minimum sight distance cannot be maintained, the applicant shall, at the applicant's expense, provide adequate traffic-control devices or other physical improvements subject to the approval and installation by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-199), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-363. Access management.
The following standards shall apply to all subdivisions and all projects requiring a land development permit where the primary access is from a state or federal highway or an arterial classified as a major, minor or residential arterial or collector street in the city transportation plan. These standards shall apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the state department of transportation: 
(1)	Commercial or office properties may be required, based on site conditions as determined by the community development director or designee, to provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites. Cross access is not required between nonresidential uses and single-family uses. 
(2)	Joint driveways, cross access easements and pedestrian access shall be established wherever feasible along a major or minor arterial or collector street. The building site shall incorporate the following: 
a.	Continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation of at least 1,000 feet of linear frontage along the thoroughfare. 
b.	A design speed of ten mph and a two-way travel aisle width of 24 feet to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles. 
c.	Stub-outs and other design features to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross access via a service drive. 
(3)	The community development director or designee may reduce the required separation distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
a.	Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided in accordance with this section. 
b.	The site plan incorporates a unified vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation system in accordance with this section. 
c.	The property owner shall enter a written agreement with city, recorded with the deed, that pre-existing connections on the site that do not meet the requirements of section 14-363 will be closed and eliminated after construction of each side of the joint use driveway. 
(4)	All developments shall have access to a public right-of-way. The number of access points shall be as follows: 
Minimum Number of Access Points 


(5)	The separation of access points on a major or minor arterial or collector street shall be determined by the speed limit of the road with the following minimum spacing requirements: 


a.	The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or public street to the centerline of the nearest existing adjacent driveway or public street. 
b.	Driveway spacing at intersections and corners shall provide adequate sight distance, response time, and permit adequate queuing space. 
c.	No driveway, except residential access, shall be allowed within 100 feet of the centerline of an intersecting arterial or collector street. 
d.	No nonresidential access except right in/right out channelized access shall be allowed within 100 feet of the centerline of any other major or minor arterial. 
e.	The requirements of this section are not intended to eliminate all access to a parcel of land that was legally subdivided prior to the enactment of this section. 
(6)	Where major or minor arterials or collector streets include medians, directional median openings shall be separated by a minimum of 330 feet and full median openings shall be separated by a minimum of 660 feet. 
(7)	All street design and other development activities, including landscaping, shall be arranged on site so as to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles. 
(8)	Along major or minor arterials, residential arterials, or collector streets, a deceleration lane, a turn lane, larger or reduced turning radius, traffic islands or other devices or designs, including traffic calming devices and designs, may be required to avoid specific traffic hazards which would otherwise be created by the proposed driveway location. 
(9)	Deceleration lanes are required for subdivision entrances of subdivisions of 20 or more units that provide less sight distance (in feet) than ten times the posted speed limit (in miles per hour). The minimum deceleration lengths shall be as specified below. The director may vary length requirements based upon a consideration of available sight distances. 
Deceleration Lanes 


Deceleration lanes located within 75 feet of an intersection radius may be extended to the intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-200), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-364. Planting strips.
The city arborist shall maintain a list of trees that are appropriate for the planting strips, and no trees other than those on the list shall be placed in the planting strips. The city arborist shall also maintain specifications regarding spacing trees, and the appropriate time for planting. The trees may not count toward the fulfillment of the requirement to plant front yard trees but may fulfill any remaining density tree requirements under the tree protection ordinance, provided the requirements for tree type for planting strips are met. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-201), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-365. Access management areas; purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent in enacting these regulations is as follows: 
(1)	To promote policies for the uniform improvement of safe and efficient movement of traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, throughout city; 
(2)	To maximize the benefit of transportation investments by maintaining a high level of functionality along major roadways; 
(3)	To encourage efficient development plans that enable individuals to fulfill their daily activities through minimal use of single-occupancy vehicles, and through increased use of alternative transportation modes such as public transit, walking, and bicycling; 
(4)	To provide for uniform control of the location, spacing, design, and operation of driveways, median openings, interchanges, and street connections to a roadway throughout city; 
(5)	To support the goals stated in the city comprehensive transportation plan, including improved multimodal transportation, increased accessibility, and improved travel safety and efficiency; and 
(6)	To provide a transportation system that results in less congestion and increased use of alternative modes of travel. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-202), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-366. Scope and applicability of regulations.
These regulations apply to each application for the development, use, alteration, parking, open space, building or modification of any structure where the subject property is, in whole or in part, contained within the boundaries of an access management area. The procedures, standards, and criteria herein apply only to that portion of the subject property within the boundaries of the access management area. Access management area regulations are supplemental to the underlying zoning district regulations. No development or building permit shall be issued to any applicant for permits for property or portions of property within an access management area until such time as the application complies with all applicable access management area regulations and underlying zoning district regulations. Where there is a conflict between an access management area regulation and another regulation contained in this Code, the access management area regulation shall govern. Where an access management area regulation is equally restrictive with other regulations in this Code, the access management area regulation shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-202.1), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-367. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Continuous service drive means a privately owned and maintained continuous drive providing for ingress and egress to a public road. 
Lower functional classification means those areas the state department of transportation designates as lower functional classification on the current functional classification map for the city. 
Throat length means the distance between the edge of the street and the end of the driveway within a development. The 50-foot throat length will allow three cars to stack up waiting to leave without interfering with the internal circulation of the parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-202.2), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-368. Driveways.
The following standards for driveway access and spacing shall apply to all properties included in an access management area. These standards shall apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the state department of transportation: 
(1)	Where roadways include medians, median openings shall be separated by a minimum of 660 feet. 
(2)	Right-turn lanes shall be required at all driveways where the right-turning volume exceeds 300 vehicles per day. 
(3)	The following driveway spacing shall be required for all driveways along the corridor between median openings or intersections with public roadways (measured center line to center line): 
a.	The minimum distance of an upstream driveway from a median opening or intersection with a public roadway shall be 300 feet in addition to the storage length required for the driveway. 
b.	The minimum distance of a downstream driveway from a median opening or intersection with a public roadway shall be 300 feet. 
(4)	All developments shall have access to a public right-of-way. Access to a public right-of-way may be obtained via an adjacent public roadway with a lower functional classification. The maximum number of driveways per parcel depends upon the length of frontage along the corridor: 
a.	For parcels with less than 600 feet of frontage, there shall be a maximum of one driveway allowed per parcel. 
b.	For parcels with at least 600 feet of frontage, there shall be a maximum of two driveways per parcel. 
c.	For parcels which have frontage along an adjacent public roadway with a lower functional classification, the maximum number of driveways will be unchanged, but the first driveway shall be located on the adjacent public roadway. 
(5)	All driveways serving a single parcel must be at least 100 feet (measured from the centerline) from the property line that is perpendicular to the property frontage, and all deceleration lanes must be contained entirely within the property frontage. For parcels with insufficient frontage to accommodate these requirements, exceptions will be allowed, but driveway locations must be approved by the city manager or his designee. Access to a public right-of-way may be obtained through a shared driveway, which provides access to more than one parcel. Shared driveways are exempt from the requirement regarding distance of the driveway from the property line. 
(6)	There shall be a minimum driveway throat length of 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-202.3), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-369. Interparcel access.
To the maximum extent possible, sidewalks and parking lots serving adjacent lots shall be interconnected to provide continuous driveway connections and pedestrian connections between adjoining lots and streets, except that this requirement shall not apply to lots zoned for single family or duplex residential units. Where necessary, the city manager or his designee may require access easements be provided to ensure continuous access and egress routes connecting commercial, office, and multifamily lots. Stub-outs shall be provided to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross-access via a continuous service drive. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-202.4), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-370. Pedestrian and bicycle access.
Connections to available transportation modes, such as driveways, sidewalks, and bike paths shall be constructed along adjacent streets and those entering adjoining properties. Safe, convenient, and handicap-accessible pedestrian ways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-202.5), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-371—14-398. Reserved.
Subdivision III. Easements
Sec. 14-399. Scope.
The provisions of this division apply to easements for or in subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-216), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-400. Permission for dedication required.
The applicant must obtain permission from the community development director or designee for the dedication of utility easements prior to the submission of the dedication. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-217), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-401. Drainage easements; off-site.
Where drainage system improvements are required on private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured by the applicant and indicated on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-219), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-402. Pedestrian and bicycle easements and paths.
Pedestrian and bicycle easements and paths shall be required in subdivision or projects requiring a land development permit to provide circulation or access to schools, parks, libraries, shopping centers, transportation centers and other community facilities. Such easements shall have a paving width of five feet. Such paths shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth in the city standards for construction and design drawings. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-220), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-403—14-432. Reserved.
Subdivision IV. Blocks
Sec. 14-433. Determination of lengths, widths and shapes.
The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks in subdivisions shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)	Provision of building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated or for the conservation of open space or existing historic features; 
(2)	Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)	Needs for convenient access by pedestrians and bicyclists to public transit, nearby schools, or commercial districts, vehicular circulation at safe speeds and adequate access for emergency vehicles; and 
(4)	Limitations and opportunities of topography to minimize land disturbance and erosion. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-236), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-434. Desirable maximum and minimum lengths.
The dimensions of blocks shall be designed to accommodate and promote vehicular circulation at safe speeds. The desirable maximum block length in a subdivision is 1,200 feet and the desirable minimum length is 300 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-237), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-435. Mid-block easements and pedestrian paths.
In blocks of 800 feet or more, the community development director or designee may require the reservation of a ten-foot easement and the paving of a five-foot-wide path through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic. Such paths shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth in the city standards of construction and design drawings. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-238), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-436—14-453. Reserved.
Subdivision V. Lots
Sec. 14-454. Dimension, shape and orientation; building, setback and yard lines.
The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building, setback, side yard, and rear yard lines in subdivisions shall be in accordance with requirements of chapter 27, zoning. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-256), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-455. Corner lots.
Corner lots for residential use in a subdivision shall have an extra width of not less than 15 feet along one frontage more than required for interior lots by the zoning ordinance for the zoning district within which they are located in order to provide appropriate front building setback from and orientation to one street. The frontage to which said extra width is added shall be subject to the approval of the director of community development or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-257), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2017-08-07, § I, 8-22-2017)
Sec. 14-456. Frontage.
Each subdivision lot shall front upon either a public or private street. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-258), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-457. Through lots and reverse frontage lots prohibited.
Through lots and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited in subdivisions except along limited access highways, such as interstate highways. Where it is necessary to provide separation of residential development from major arterials or to overcome-specific disadvantages of topography and orientation, the lots fronting such features may be platted in greater depth so that dwellings may be set back an appropriate distance from the major arterial or other feature. Such lots may obtain vehicular access from a rear alley. Lots having access from a public alley shall not constitute a prohibited through lot. A landscape reservation of at least ten feet in width, and across which there shall be no right of vehicular access, may be required-along the lot lines of lots abutting any disadvantageous feature or land use where access should be restricted in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-259), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-458. Side lot lines.
Side lot lines in subdivisions shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines as they extend from the front lot line to the front building line. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-260), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-459—14-484. Reserved.
Subdivision VI. Reservation of Open Spaces
Sec. 14-485. Open space required; purposes.
(a)	All residential subdivisions under five acres or consisting of 36 or less dwelling units may, and all residential subdivisions greater than five acres or consisting of more than 36 dwelling units shall be required to provide open space, in order to achieve the following public purposes: 
(1)	Conserve open land, including those areas containing historic or cultural resources, or sensitive natural features and wildlife habitats; 
(2)	Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance; and 
(3)	Preserve and develop an adequate tree cover. 
(b)	Open space shall be a minimum of 20 percent of the land in all new subdivision developments. 
(c)	Open space required by this section may be used in a variety of ways, including natural areas for wildlife and ecological functions, parks, gardens, landscaped medians, squares, village greens, courtyards, recreational space, or recreational facilities, provided the use is consistent with the requirements of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-275), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-486. Restrictions on open space.
No more than 20 percent of the open space area may be covered with an impervious surface. Impervious surfaces may include paved trails, bike paths or multi-use paths, buildings, plazas, swimming pools, or athletic courts. Impervious surfaces in open space may not include sidewalks along public rights of way or parking lots, streets, or other areas for motorized vehicular use. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-276), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-487. Dedication of parks, open space, recreation areas and conservation easements.
Parks, open space, multi-use trails, recreation areas and conservation easements may be offered for dedication to the city by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-277), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-488—14-512. Reserved.
Subdivision VII. Sites for Civic Uses
Sec. 14-513. Reservation of sites.
A developer may reserve and offer property within a subdivision as a site for a civic use, including, but not limited to, public schools, fire stations, police stations, or recreation centers. The developer shall allow a minimum period of one year from the date of submittal of submittal of the preliminary plat during which time the proper authorities may authorize acquisition of the property for its intended civic purposes. If the reserved site has not been authorized for acquisition by the proper authorities within one year, the reservation shall terminate unless extended by the developer. If not extended, development of the formerly reserved site must follow the standard plat approval process. An amended final plat for the entire subdivision shall then be processed in the required manner when submitted by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-286), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-514—14-534. Reserved.
Subdivision VIII. Cluster Mailboxes
Sec. 14-535. Compliance with installation and maintenance.
(a)	All cluster mailboxes, whether installed on public or private streets, shall comply with the United States Postal Service (USPS) standards for the construction of mailboxes. A statement indicating the type of mail delivery available by the USPS (e.g.,delivery to an individual mailbox or central delivery via cluster mailbox stations) shall be indicated on an approved subdivision plat or development permit. 
(b)	A letter, e-mail, or other correspondence from the USPS indicating the type of mail delivery that will be available to the proposed development shall be provided. The correspondence should also indicate, either by description or drawing, that the proposed location for the proposed cluster mailbox stations, if applicable, is acceptable to the postal service. 
(c)	Installation of the mailbox stations, as well as any associated shelters, lighting, parking, and other related amenities shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
(d)	Maintenance of the mailbox stations, as well as any associated shelters, lighting, parking, and other related amenities shall be the responsibility of the homeowners. The establishment of a homeowners' association is strongly encouraged in developments where individual mail delivery will be unavailable. 
(e)	Cluster box stations and associated improvements that provide for access to the cluster box stations shall be located within a common area or an access easement and are subject to approval of the public works department prior to installation. The proposed location of cluster box stations and associated improvements that provide for access shall be shown on development plans and the installed location shall be shown on an approved plat when permitting or platting requirements dictate permitting of development plans or city approval of a plat. 
(f)	For individual, non-cluster mailboxes, refer to section 23-7. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05-01(A), § 1(14-451), 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 14-536. Design standards.
(a)	Cluster mailbox stations shall be prohibited within the public right-of-way. 
(b)	Cluster mailbox stations, and any associated structures, shall not adversely impact sight distance to any driveway or road intersection, as determined by the public works department. Whenever feasible, the mailbox stations should be located within an amenity center, if one is proposed for the development. 
(c)	Cluster mailbox stations shall be located in areas that will best allow for vehicle stacking or parking without creating pedestrian or vehicle safety issues as determined by the public works department. 
(d)	A paved area with adequate ingress/egress, designed to meet the requirements of the public works department, shall be provided to allow vehicles to pull off the roadway safely while retrieving mail. 
(e)	All access to cluster mailbox stations shall comply with current Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Georgia Accessibility Code requirements. Any sidewalks required by other provisions of this code shall be incorporated into the mailbox station area. 
(f)	The mailbox stations shall be installed according to the manufacturer's standards, subject to the approval of the department of community development. 
(g)	The mailbox stations and shelter, if any, shall be exempt from normal setback requirements; however, shelters or other structures must be submitted to the department of community development for review and must meet all applicable building codes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05-01(A), § 1(14-452), 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 14-537—14-565. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Subdivision I. In General
Sec. 14-566. Scope.
This division applies to required improvements for or in subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-296), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-567. Location of required utilities in public rights-of-way.
All required utilities within city rights of way shall be located as shown in city standards of drawings and specifications maintained by the community development department and as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-297), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-568—14-597. Reserved.
Subdivision II. Water
Sec. 14-598. Water system and fire hydrants.
Water mains and appurtenances shall be connected to a public water supply in accordance with the requirements of the authority having jurisdiction to provide water service within the city, herein referred to as the water authority. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-313), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-599. Materials, location of mains.
All materials for water mains in subdivisions will conform to specifications of the water authority. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-314), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-600. Fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants will be installed in subdivisions so that all residential property will meet the requirements of the authority having jurisdiction to provide fire and rescue service within the city. Additional fire hydrant locations may be required by the city fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-315), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-601. Submission of water service data for location of water system.
The applicant shall furnish data on the final subdivision plat in digitized form, or as required, to the community development director or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-319), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-602. Material storage and responsibility.
It shall be the contractor's responsibility to acquire, properly handle, store and protect all materials. The city shall not be held responsible for loss or damage to any materials. No damaged material shall be utilized in the water line construction. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-323), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-603. Excavation.
(a)	Depth. Trench excavation and cover over water lines shall be in accordance with the requirements of the water authority. 
(b)	Sheeting. The contractor shall install sheeting and bracing where necessary to prevent caving, to protect new work and to protect adjacent utility lines, and public and private property. 
(c)	Blasting. Blasting shall be permitted only with the written approval of the city for each location. The contractor shall provide adequate protection, such as mats, and permit only qualified, experienced personnel to supervise blasting. Approval by the city in no way relieves the contractor from any liability for any damages whatsoever resulting from the blasting operations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-324), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-604. Pipe laying.
Pipe laying shall conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the water authority. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-325), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-605. Backfilling.
(a)	All backfilling in subdivisions shall be done with material free from roots, stumps and other foreign material. No rock will be permitted within a distance of six inches from the pipe or ground surface. Rock larger than 12 inches in greatest dimension will not be allowed in any part of the trench. All rock larger than 12 inches shall be disposed of by the contractor. 
(b)	The placing and compaction of all backfill material shall be as follows: 
(1)	Backfill from bottom of trench to one foot above the top of the pipe shall be compacted in layers not exceeding six inches, after compaction. Backfill along the sides and to the top of the pipe shall be hand tamped with acceptable hand tamps or mechanically operated hand-tampers, vibrators, etc. 
(2)	From a point one foot above the top of the pipe to the surface of the trench, backfill shall be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding 12 inches in thickness after compaction. The method of compaction in this section of the trench may be by any reasonable method that will give required compaction. After compaction, the dry weight per cubic foot of any six-inch depth of backfill shall be at least 95 percent of the maximum dry weight per cubic foot, as determined by the American Association of State Highway Official Method T-99. 
(3)	The contractor shall restore to the original condition as at the start of the job, all shrubbery, grass, sod, fences, etc., disturbed during the contractor's operations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-326), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-606. Pavement replacement.
Cuts in existing street pavement and driveways will be patched by the applicant/owner. The applicant/owner shall maintain the cuts in good condition until a permanent patch is made. When necessary to abate dust, mud or potholing, the contractor shall furnish and install crushed rock or cold patch asphaltic concrete to the surface of the trench. Appropriate utility permits must be obtained from the public works director prior to work being initiated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-327), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-607. Barricades and lights.
The contractor shall furnish and place sufficient barricades and lights to adequately protect the work on subdivision water improvements, and to protect all vehicular and pedestrian traffic. No street shall be completely blocked without the permission of the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-328), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-608. Testing.
All subdivision mains, including fire hydrants and service laterals, shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of the water authority. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-329), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-609. Sterilization of mains.
The contractor will furnish all chemicals, feeding equipment and manpower for the sterilization of water mains. The contractor is responsible for the disposal of dose water in accordance with environmental protection division regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-330), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-610. Cleanup.
A thorough cleanup shall be made before final acceptance of subdivision water improvements. All excess rock shall be removed; private and public property shall be restored to original condition, and all excess water line materials removed from the job site. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-331), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-611. Service lateral locations.
The contractor shall submit an as-built drawing showing the location, lot number and street address for each service lateral installed in a subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-332), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-612. Maintenance.
(a)	The owner/applicant shall maintain all water mains, appurtenances, trenches and other disturbed surfaces. 
(b)	The contractor shall be responsible for repairs to any leaking pipe, fittings, etc. Should any trench settle, the contractor shall promptly furnish and place fill to original grade. Should any leak or trench settlement occur under any pavement, the contractor will be held responsible for the cost of replacing pavement. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-333), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-613—14-642. Reserved.
Subdivision III. Sewers
Sec. 14-643. Where laid; exceptions.
(a)	Sanitary sewers shall be laid in all streets, service connections installed to property lines, and connections made to trunk line sewers in all subdivisions including subdivisions with private disposal systems. 
(b)	In all developments with private disposal systems, lines shall be laid and temporarily plugged or capped at the points of service connections to the proposed trunk sewer line and individual lot lines in accordance with city requirements and specifications. 
(c)	Corresponding service connections shall be installed and temporarily plugged or capped from each principal structure in such a manner that a proper service connection can be made when permanent sewer service is available. This subsection may be waived by the community development director or designee based upon service feasibility to the principal structure as determined by the elevation of the structure with reference to the elevation of the proposed sewer line. 
(d)	The requirements of this section may be waived by the city council. Applications for this waiver shall be submitted to the council through the community development director, who shall schedule the request for a public meeting before the city council. The waiver may be granted by the council if it finds that the property for which a waiver is sought is in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code and the county board of health regulations concerning the minimum lot size for private disposal systems, and if the property is located in any of the following areas: 
(1)	An area of the city where, due to topographic or soil conditions, public sewer service is not feasible. 
(2)	An area of the city where the installation of sewer service is not scheduled under the approved capital improvements program of the city. 
(3)	An area of the city where the installation of sewer service is not planned to be accomplished within a six-year period. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-351), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-644. Design.
Design of the proposed sewer system within a development shall conform to the specifications of the authority having jurisdiction to provide sewer service within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-352), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-645. Filing of plan.
Filing of plans shall conform to the specifications of the authority having jurisdiction to provide sewer service within the city at the time a development permit application is received by the community development department. The lowest minimum finished floor elevation shall be noted for each lot. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-353), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-646. Materials.
Materials shall conform to the specifications of the authority having jurisdiction to provide sewer service within the city at the time a development permit application is received by the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-354), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-647. Construction.
Construction shall conform to the specifications of the authority having jurisdiction to provide sewer service within the city at the time a development permit application is received by the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-355), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-648. Maintenance.
(a)	The owner/applicant shall maintain all sewer lines, appurtenances, trenches and other disturbed surfaces for a period of 12 months after approval and acceptance by the authority having jurisdiction to provide sewer service within the city, or as otherwise required by the authority. 
(b)	The owner/applicant shall be responsible for repairs to sewer system. Should any trenches settle, the owner/applicant shall promptly furnish and place fill to original grade. Should any leaks or trench settlement occur under any pavement, the contractor will be held responsible for the cost of replacing pavement. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-359), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-649—14-669. Reserved.
Subdivision IV. Streets
Sec. 14-670. Standards.
(a)	Application. The provisions of this subdivision apply to streets in subdivisions, public streets in the city, and in other projects requiring a development, encroachment, land disturbance, or building permit from the city. 
(b)	General improvements. Street improvements shall be provided in accordance with the specifications in this part and the standard plans and specifications available from the city. The term "state transportation department specifications" shall refer to the state department of transportation specifications in effect at the time the work is placed under contract. The references made to these specifications shall control the materials and equipment as well as the construction method of every class of work so applicable unless otherwise noted. 
(c)	Grading. The construction limits shall be cleared of all trees, stumps, brush and rubbish before grading operations are begun. No trees, stumps, brush or rubbish shall be placed in fill sections within the construction limits. Such debris shall be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the community development department. Fill sections shall be placed in six-inch layers with each layer thoroughly compacted with a sheep foot roller or by other approved methods before the next layer is placed, compaction to be not less than 95 percent as determined by AASHTO, section T-99. Where unsatisfactory material is encountered (namely any material that will not compact properly, including solid rock) an additional 12 inches shall be excavated below the subgrade elevation and backfilled with a select material. Where unstable material is used in fills, the fill shall be left 12 inches below the subgrade elevation. This 12-inch fill section shall be filled with select material. Streets shall be graded to width of not less than 42 feet in the center of the right-of-way to provide eight-foot shoulders in accordance with city's standard plan. 
(d)	Curbing. Curbing shall be required on all streets and shall be furnished and installed by the applicant unless grassed swales are used for water quality control and approved by the public works department. Curb requirements are applicable to every permit for new development. The minimum classes and types of curbing permitted will be as follows: 
(1)	Granite curbing, class D or better. Where it currently exists: 
a.	Granite curb is required to be repaired and replaced. 
b.	Granite curb is required to be raised to a six inch reveal, as needed, pursuant to the standard detail used by the city. 
c.	The standard detail and/or notes reflecting the same must be included on the plans associated with permit applications. 
(2)	Other as approved by the public works director. All curbing shall be placed in firm well-compacted subgrade, and curbing displaced prior to acceptance for maintenance by the city shall be reset or replaced. Specifications for the granite curbing and concrete are available from the city public works department. 
(e)	Base and paving. All roadways shall be paved according to the specifications prepared and approved by the public works director in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the community development department. 
(f)	As-built drawings. As-built drawings for all new streets shall be submitted to the community development department depicting a street profile based on the centerline and 50 foot stations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-04, § 1(14-376), 1-13-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-04, § I, 3-27-2017)
Sec. 14-671. Street signs.
(a)	The city's standard steel post with horizontal reflectorized street nameplates with four-inch letters shall be furnished and set by the city at all subdivision street intersections. 
(b)	Street name signs shall have four-inch black letters on reflectorized silver background with black border. Nameplates shall be mounted parallel or nearly parallel to the street. The names shall be marked and visible from both sides. Signposts shall be ten-foot poles with at least three feet well-embedded in the ground. 
(c)	The applicant shall pay to the city for each street name sign a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)	To ensure that all street markers are paid for by the applicant and installed at the proper time, the required street markers will be paid for by the applicant at the time of recording. 
(1)	For subdivisions recorded under a performance bond, the street marker will not be installed until the paving has been completed. 
(2)	For subdivisions recorded under a maintenance bond, the public works department will be furnished a plat and a memo requesting that street markers be installed at the time of recording. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-377), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-672. Road hazards prohibited.
Subdivision signs, planter boxes, and other similar permanent structures shall not be located on street rights-of-way and shall not be constructed in a manner which, in the opinion of the city, obstructs driveway sight distance or creates a traffic hazard; detailed plans for these structures shall be submitted to community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-378), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-673. Surface drainage specifications.
(a)	The size, length and location of all surface drainage pipe or structures shall be shown on the final subdivision plats and shall be subject to the approval of the public works department. All storm drain pipes or culverts carrying stormwater from the street and adjacent property between or through lots shall be extended to at least 30 feet behind the rear of the house. Stormwater must be released into a channel without causing scouring, erosion or resulting sedimentation to the receiving channel. When necessary, the outlet channel shall include structural and vegetative measures to ensure nonerosion velocities. This requirement for pipe extension shall only apply to the discharge ends of piped systems. 
(1)	An exception to extending pipes 30 feet behind the rear of the house may be made for pipes 54 inches and larger where the house site is proposed to be more than 30 feet from the center of the drainageway. 
(2)	An exception to extending pipes 30 feet behind the rear of the house may be granted by the city when soil conditions prohibit erosion. 
(3)	An exception to extending pipes 30 feet behind the rear of the house may be granted by the city where lots are at least one acre in size, open channels are provided, and neither ponding nor erosion will result. 
(b)	Installation, backfilling and compaction shall be in accordance with state transportation department specifications, sections 106 and 520. All pipes shall have a minimum cover of one foot and headwalls or inlet basins constructed at the end of each pipe. 
(c)	The design of drainage structures shall be based on recognized hydrological formulas as outlined in the approved city stormwater management manual. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-379), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2019-02-01, § I, 2-12-2019)
Sec. 14-674. Plans, profiles to be approved.
Four copies of the complete plans and profiles for subdivision street improvements shall be submitted for review and recommendation of approval or denial by the public works department of subdivision streets prior to approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-380), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-675. Bonds or escrow required.
(a)	If, at the time the final plat is submitted for approval, the construction of the street improvements has not been accomplished, then the final plat shall be disapproved. No performance bonds shall be allowed or authorized except the city manager shall require a performance bond to be filed with the city to ensure that all final road improvements required by this Code are made by the owner or applicant. The city shall accept no road until such time as all road improvements required by the city are made. 
(b)	After the work has been completed according to the city specifications and duly inspected by the city, then a maintenance bond shall be required equal to ten percent of the estimated construction cost. The proposed maintenance bond shall be reviewed and approved as to form by the city attorney prior to acceptance by the city. The maintenance bond shall cover the street improvements, drainage system. Funds may be placed in escrow with the city in lieu of maintenance bonds. 
(c)	The applicant shall be required to sign a maintenance agreement with the city, by which the applicant shall agree to maintain the streets, drainage, water quality BMPs, water and sewer systems, and rights-of-way for a period of 12 months. During the applicant maintenance period, the city shall make inspections and instruct the applicant by letter as to what correction must be made. 
(d)	In case of emergency repairs, which must be made immediately, or required corrections, which are not made within 30 days of notice, the city shall have the authority to make these corrections and recover costs from the applicant. In cases where funds are being held in escrow by the city, the cost of making these corrections shall be deducted from these funds, and the applicant charged with any costs above the amount of escrow funds. 
(e)	At the end of the 12-month applicant maintenance period, the city shall make a final inspection and notify the applicant and the bonding company of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable, the community development department shall recommend to the city attorney that all remaining escrow funds be released. 
(f)	Provided, however, in the discretion of the city manager based upon: 
(1)	Weather conditions; 
(2)	Labor market; 
(3)	Material market; or 
(4)	Circumstances beyond the control of the applicant or the city unforeseen by either party; 
the maintenance period may be extended for a definite period of time sufficient to make the necessary corrections by an agreement in writing executed by the city, the applicant and his surety; provided further that the applicant shall be responsible for any damages done to work already completed by him to the time of the extension agreement, whether or not the city had accepted it. 
(g)	Maintenance bonds and acceptance by the city of any dedicated improvements shall be as one package upon completion of all improvements, even though the final plat may have been approved prior to completion. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-381), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-676. Standard plans and specifications available.
Standard city plans and specifications referred to in this part are on file and may be obtained from the community development department. The plans are cross sections and construction drawings for a graded street, paved street, driveway section for curbed streets, brick catch basin, barricade for dead-end streets, 24-inch concrete curb and gutter section and standard street marker. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-382), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-677. Sidewalks and bicycle lanes.
(a)	Sidewalks shall be required on all sides of street frontage on all new and improved local residential streets in all subdivisions and along the street frontage of all new and improved developments and as set forth in section 14-353 or Future Sidewalk/Trail/Path List adopted by the city council. Where sidewalks are determined to be required, if there is existing noncompliant sidewalk, the existing sidewalk shall be replaced as necessary. These noncompliant conditions include sidewalk/trail widths and longitudinal and cross-sectional slopes to meet ADA standards. At a minimum, however, continuous sidewalks shall be required on at least one side of all new and improved local residential streets on all new and improved sites. The official Future Sidewalk/Trail/Path List shall be located in the office of the public works department and city website. 
(b)	Sidewalks and trails shall be shown on drawings attached to all development and building permits as set forth in section 14-353 and the Future Sidewalk/Trail/Path List adopted by council. No development or building permits will be approved unless sidewalks are shown on the plans. 
(c)	If a sidewalk is not shown on the council adopted Future Sidewalk/Trail/Path List or required as set forth in section 14-353, developers and builders shall contribute to the sidewalk fund in-lieu of sidewalk construction in an amount equal to the length of the property frontage. For corner lots, payment in lieu shall be based on the length of the front of the lot as defined by chapter 27. 
(d)	Payment in-lieu of sidewalk construction shall be in accordance with a schedule recommended by the public works department and adopted by the city council in January of each year and based on city sidewalk construction cost during the previous calendar year. 
(e)	The community development department may require that sidewalks required pursuant to subsection (a) of this section be continued to the nearest major or minor arterial or collector street. 
(f)	A grassed, planted or landscaped strip, as set forth in section 14-353, shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs, bridges excepted. Where sidewalks currently exist, new sidewalk construction or re-construction shall be continuous with existing sidewalks. 
(g)	Sidewalks shall be concrete and a minimum of five feet wide and four inches thick. In nonresidential districts, where the public works director or designee may approve sidewalks to be located immediately behind the curb, such sidewalks shall be six feet in width. Concrete shall be Class B, as defined by the state department of transportation, and have a minimum strength of 2,500 psi at 28 days. Disturbed areas along sidewalks shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed. 
(h)	Sidewalks shall be installed at the same time as the building construction, unless an alternative method is approved by the community development department. All sidewalks shall be shown on the final plat and recorded prior to obtaining building permits. Sidewalks shall be completed prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy for property on which the sidewalk fronts. 
(i)	Sidewalks shall not be cut, removed or closed temporarily without a permit from the public works department. Such permit shall not be issued unless safe, adequate, and convenient provision is made for pedestrian travel through the area that is disrupted. Damage to sidewalks caused during construction or development activity shall be repaired at no cost to the city within 30 days or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is earlier. 
(j)	All sidewalk construction and repairs shall conform to federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards and provide for wheelchair ramps to and from sidewalks at the intersection of each street corner and crosswalk. Access ramps shall be constructed pursuant to standards approved by the public works department. 
(k)	No person shall construct a sidewalk on any street in the city without first having obtained a permit to do so from the public works department. Any person constructing a sidewalk on a street, without first obtaining a permit, shall be in violation of this Code, and the public works department shall be authorized to condemn the sidewalk and have it removed and replaced at no cost to the city. 
(l)	Bicycle lanes shall be required and constructed pursuant to the city bicycle, pedestrian, and trail plan and/or other planning documents and as follows: 
(1)	Bicycle lanes, where required, shall be placed in the outside lane of a roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be located between the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Bicycle pavement widths shall be in addition to the minimum pavement width required for the road. 
(2)	Bicycle lanes shall be delineated with signs and striping consistent with the latest edition of the manual for uniform traffic control devices, and approved by the public works director. 
(3)	Bikeways and bicycle lanes shall be constructed according to the most recent specifications set forth in American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) guidelines. 
(4)	The design, striping and sign system for bicycle lanes shall be coordinated with that of the vehicular road system to provide a safe and continuous route for bicycles. Deceleration lanes shall be striped so that bicycles can safely remain in a lane marked between the deceleration lane and the through traffic lane. 
(m)	No wall, fence, sign or other structure shall obstruct passage along a sidewalk or bicycle lane. 
(n)	The community development director or designee may approve a variable location, width, and construction material for sidewalks and planted strips subject to the following considerations: 
(1)	Existing site conditions that would require significant encroachment onto existing single family lots. 
(2)	Future road expansions proposed in the city capital improvement program. 
(3)	Impact to existing trees including: 
a.	Critical root zone encroachments by existing improvements or proposed sidewalk installation that exceed the percentage permitted by the tree ordinance. 
b.	The current health of the trees within the path of a required sidewalk. 
c.	Ability to pore the required sidewalk on grade to lessen impact to critical root zones if other standards (e.g. ADA) can be met. 
(4)	Ability for alternative compliance measures to meet ADA requirements, such as width and slope of required sidewalks. 
(5)	Conflict with other development standards of this Code or other existing site conditions that support alternative installation allowances. These other standards or conditions include, but are not limited to, existing utilities, steep topography, stream buffers, cemeteries, right-of-way dedication, etc. 
(6)	Should it be determined by the community development director or designee that alternative compliance measures are insufficient to provide adequate tree protection, payment into the sidewalk fund may be accepted pursuant to the rate adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-383), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2017-07-04, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-04-03, § I, 4-24-2018; Ord. No. 2018-06-01, § I, 6-12-2018; Ord. No. 2019-07-05, § I(Attch.), 7-23-2019; Ord. No. 2019-10-03, § I(Attch.), 10-22-2019; Ord. No. 2020-12-01, § I, 12-8-2020; Ord. No. 2021-06-02, § I(Attch.), 6-15-2021)
Sec. 14-678. Parking on public right-of-way.
(a)	For residential projects constructed under the provisions of the zoning ordinance as single-family attached residential projects, wherein title to the single-family unit is held by fee simple ownership, the city shall assume maintenance responsibility one year after the release of the subdivision bonds for parking constructed on public rights-of-way, in accordance with minimum city standards. A special parking maintenance district, as authorized by Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VI, comprised of all property within such single-family attached residential subdivision, is established for the maintenance of such parking constructed on the public right-of-way at the time the subdivision plat is finally recorded, provided such plat is so noted as required by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	Final subdivision plats for single-family attached residential projects shall have the following notation when a special district is to be established for city maintenance of parking within the public right-of-way: 
All single-family residential lots on this plat are included in a special taxing district for funding the maintenance of parking provided in the development. 
(c)	Pursuant to the creation of special parking districts by the city, as authorized by Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VI, revenue to fund city parking maintenance will be obtained by an ad valorem tax levied on all properties within such parking district. Such ad valorem millage will be set annually by the city council when other ad valorem millage rates are set. No assessment will be made in a special parking district in the calendar year in which it is established. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-384), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-679. Underground utilities.
All utilities are required to be placed underground in all new subdivisions of two or more lots except where no utility improvements are required by this chapter, or where the community development director determines underground utilities are infeasible due to shallow rock, high water table, or other similar geologic or hydrologic conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-385), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-680. Streetlights.
Streetlights consistent with state power specifications, are required in all new subdivisions of two or more lots except where no utility improvements are required by this chapter. Streetlights shall be provided on the same side of the street as sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-386), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-681—14-703. Reserved.
Subdivision V. Private Sewage Disposal
Sec. 14-704. Drainage between lots.
Where drainage between subdivision lots is involved and pipe is required, a watertight pipe shall be used and shall extend for a sufficient depth of the lot and not terminate at some point just behind the building line causing pools to be formed or stormwater flooding the area of the septic tank drain field. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-400), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-705. Impoundment permit.
Where ponds one-tenth of an acre or larger are located in a subdivision or adjoin a subdivision, an impoundment permit shall be obtained in compliance with the impounded water regulations of the state board of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-401), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 14-706. Compliance with board of health requirements.
All septic tank systems shall conform to the requirements of the county board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-06, § 1(14-402), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 14-707—14-725. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 14-726. Findings of fact.
It is determined that: 
(1)	The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)	Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(3)	Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
a.	Protect human life and health; 
b.	Minimize damage to private property; 
c.	Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
d.	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)	Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain this article and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-407), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-727. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)	Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)	Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-408), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-728. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-409), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-729. Designation of article administrator.
The community development director or their designee is appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-410), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-730. Basis for area of special flood hazard; flood area maps and studies.
For the purposes of this article, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)	The current Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and data for DeKalb County, Georgia, dated August 15, 2019 (or later), with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are adopted by reference. 
(2)	Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.	Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.	Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the director. 
(3)	Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.	Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.	Any future conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the director. 
(4)	The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-411), 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2013-10-03, § 1, 10-8-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-01, § I, 2-12-2019; Ord. No. 2020-10-01, § I(attch.), 10-13-2020)
Sec. 14-731. Compatibility with other regulations.
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-412), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-732. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-414), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-733. Specific definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain coordinator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced in section 14-730. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Areas hydraulically adjacent to the Future-conditions Floodplain means those areas that are at or below either three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
Base flood means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade; i.e., below ground level on all sides. 
Basin means a region or land area drained by a single river system. 
Building. See definition for "Structure." 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Director means the community development director or designee. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 10, 2013. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the instillation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 10, 2013. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazards or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report issued by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, and water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding floodplain coordinator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of stream or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purposes unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology (also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood). 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications, within a stream or other waterway, such as a bridge or culvert construction, fill and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places as eligible in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities that comprise or facilitate a result in land development. 
Land development project means a specific land development undertaking. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) or land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929 means the vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within a floodplain. 
New construction, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 10, 2013, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the instillation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 10, 2013. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the director to the applicant that is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit issuance. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab for footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
(1)	The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)	In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads when the cost of such repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-415), 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2017-08-07, § I, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-02-01, § I, 2-12-2019; Ord. No. 2019-03-01, § I, 3-12-2019; Ord. No. 2020-10-01, § I(attch.), 10-13-2020)
Secs. 14-734—14-764. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMITS AND PLANS
Sec. 14-765. Permit application requirements.
(a)	No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this division prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)	Unless specifically excluded by this division, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the director a permit application on a form provided by the director for that purpose. 
(c)	No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-416), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-766. Floodplain management plan requirements.
(a)	An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management I flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)	Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.	Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.	For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.	Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.	Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.	Proposed grading plan; 
f.	Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.	Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.	If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.	Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)	Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 14-815(2); 
d.	For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 14-814(5); and 
e.	Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structures. 
(3)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(4)	Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS. 
(5)	Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development. 
(6)	All appropriate certifications required under this division. 
(b)	The approved floodplain management I flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-417), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-767. Construction stage submittal requirements.
(a)	For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management I flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the floodplain coordinator a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(b)	Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain coordinator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. 
(c)	Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-418), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-768. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain coordinator.
Duties of the floodplain coordinator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development applications and permits to ensure that the requirements of this division have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)	Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to meet the provisions of divisions 3 and 4 of this article; 
(4)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)	When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)	Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)	Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this division. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(9)	Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this division in the office and shall open them for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-419), 9-10-2013)
Secs. 14-769—14-789. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 14-790. Definition of floodplain boundaries.
(a)	Studied A-zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)	For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the director. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the director, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-420), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-791. Definition of floodway boundaries.
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the director. If floodway data is not available from the director, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-421), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-792. General standards.
(a)	No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)	Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)	Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)	Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)	Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)	Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)	Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. The area of compensation within the floodplain shall be considered as ineffective flow area for the purpose of calculating floodplain elevations to meet no-rise certification requirements. The amount of compensation shall be limited to 300 cubic yards per acre of floodplain area. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)	Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent; 
(3)	Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)	Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 14-793; 
(5)	Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)	Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the director using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(7)	For residential lots, not less than 70 percent of the buildable land area must lie above the base flood elevation, a minimum of three feet, and not less than 50 percent of the minimum lot area must lie above the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-422), 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2018-03-07, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-10-01, § I(attch.), 10-13-2020; Ord. No. 2020-12-03, § I, 12-8-2020)
Sec. 14-793. Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments.
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations or floodways for which the provisions of section 14-817 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the director prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)	Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the director. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)	Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)	The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-423), 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2018-03-07, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 14-794. Floodway encroachments.
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) of this section; 
(2)	Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data anti certification thereof; and 
(3)	If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the director until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-424), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-795. Maintenance requirements.
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The director may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-425), 9-10-2013)
Secs. 14-796—14-813. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 14-814. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 14-792, 14-793 and 14-794 have been met; 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)	Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.	So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this division, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(6)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(9)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(10)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
(11)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this division, is undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; and 
(12)	If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-426), 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-01, § I, 2-12-2019)
Sec. 14-815. Building standards for structures and buildings within the areas of special flood hazard.
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 14-792, shall apply: 
(1)	Residential buildings.
 a.	New construction and substantial improvements. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the area of special flood hazard unless all requirements of sections 14-792, 14-793 and 14-794 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 14-792, 14-793 and 14-794 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 14-814(5). 
(2)	Nonresidential buildings.
 a.	New construction and substantial improvements. New construction and substantial improvements of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the area of special flood hazard unless all requirements of sections 14-792, 14-793 and 14-794 have been met. New construction and substantial improvements that has met all of the requirements of sections 14-792, 14-793 and 14-794 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain coordinator. 
(3)	Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 14-814(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)	Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.	Meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (subsection (1)b of this section), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)	Standards for manufactured homes.
 a.	New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 14-792, 14-793 and 14-794 have been met. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 14-814(7). 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-427), 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-01, § I, 2-12-2019)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2019-02-01, § I, adopted Feb. 12, 2019, amended § 14-815 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain" to "Building standards for structures and buildings within the areas of special flood hazard," as set out herein. 
Sec. 14-816. Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain.
(a)	Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 14-814(5). 
(b)	Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 14-814(5). 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-428), 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-01, § I, 2-12-2019)
Sec. 14-817. Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations or floodway (A-zones).
(a)	For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the floodplain coordinator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this division. 
(b)	If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with section 14-814(5). 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-429), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-818. Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-Zones).
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-814(5); 
(2)	Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-430), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-819. Standards for subdivisions.
(a)	All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
(b)	All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
(c)	All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 14-766. 
(d)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(e)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(f)	All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-431), 9-10-2013)
Secs. 14-820—14-846. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. VARIANCE PROCEDURES
Sec. 14-847. Request for variance; appeals.
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this division. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the director or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein. 
(1)	Requests for variances from the requirements of this division shall be submitted to the director. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the director. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)	Any person adversely affected by any decision of the director shall have the right to appeal such decision to the board of appeals as established by the city in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the board of appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county by writ of certiorari, as provided in this Code and the Official Code of Georgia. 
(4)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)	In reviewing such requests, the director and board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this division. 
(8)	Conditions for variances. 
a.	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.	A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.	The provisions of this division are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.	Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.	The floodplain coordinator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)	Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the director and board of appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this division, the director and the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this division. 
(11)	Variances shall not be issued after the fact. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-432), 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 14-848—14-872. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES
Sec. 14-873. Imposition; equitable relief.
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this division or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described of this division shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-433), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-874. Notice of violation.
(a)	If the floodplain coordinator determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this division, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this division without having first secured a permit thereof, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)	The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner or the responsible person; 
(2)	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this division and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)	A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the director by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-434), 9-10-2013)
Sec. 14-875. Penalties.
(a)	Procedure. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the director shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the director may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)	Stop work order. The director may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)	Withhold certificate of occupancy. The director may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The director may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the director may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(b)	Issuance of citation; violation. For violations of this article, the director may issue a citation to the owner or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the appropriate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person may be punished as set forth in section 1-11. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09-03, § 1(14-435), 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Chapter 16 NUISANCES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. Purpose and findings.
The governing authority of the city finds that nuisances are such activities and conditions that cause a demonstrable adverse impact on the community. These activities and conditions may be associated with illegal criminal activity that has also been proven to have a demonstrable adverse impact on community residences and results in neighborhood blight. The city finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of the city in enacting the ordinance from which this chapter is derived are as follows: 
(1)	To state that it is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; 
(2)	To preserve the value of property and prevent neighborhood blight that arises from poorly maintained property; 
(3)	To maintain and promote an attractive residential area and commercial area by requiring that dilapidated property be repaired or removed; 
(4)	To maintain for the city's residents, workers and visitors an aesthetically attractive environment and to advance the aesthetic interest of the city; 
(5)	To protect the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of city by the removal of both criminal perpetrators and the housing blight on the community; 
(6)	To require owners of real property to keep their property in compliance with building, safety and fire codes to minimize the occurrence of illegal criminal activity therein; 
(7)	To promote the safety of its citizens, to preserve property values, to provide for the convenience and enjoyment of public areas, to attract tourists, settlers and industry, to serve the public health, safety and aesthetics, to advance the general prosperity of the community and to serve the general welfare; and 
(8)	To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-02, att. A(18-1), 2-26-2013)
Sec. 16-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official means the officer or other person designated by the director with the authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code or his designee. 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act," as may hereinafter be amended. 
Dwelling, building, or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any portion of the public way that abuts the parcel of property when it is used in conjunction with the abutting property for the commission of nuisance activity described in section 16-23. The term "dwelling, building, or structure" shall not mean or include any farm, and building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Interest holder. See Party-in-interest. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record including any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)	Has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)	Has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. 
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as the owner. 
Party-in-interest or interest holder means an individual, association, entity or corporation, executor, administrator, guardian, or trustee that has a legal interest in or possession of a dwelling, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of the city council or their or his designee. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-02, att. A(18-2), 2-26-2013)
Sec. 16-3. Jurisdiction to abate.
(a)	Summary abatement. Any judge of the municipal court or the mayor or the mayor's designee shall have the power to order the removal and abatement, without hearing, of those things that are declared either by the common law or statute law to be nuisances, or that are nuisances per se. 
(b)	Service of notice to abate. Any requirement of service of notice to abate a nuisance, which may be summarily abated, may be complied with by the mailing of such notice by registered mail to the last-known address of the person to be so notified. 
(c)	Service on complaint to abate a nuisance. On the hearing of any complaint before a judge of the municipal court concerning a nuisance and removal and abatement, reasonable notice shall be given to the parties interested, including the owner or occupant of the premises where the alleged nuisance is taking place and the person causing the nuisance, of the time and place of the hearing upon the complaint. 
(d)	Persons authorized to perform the removal or abatement of nuisances. After a nuisance has been ordered to be abated or removed, as provided in this section, it may be removed or otherwise abated by any employee designated by the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-06, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-4. Collection by lien of cost of abatement of nuisance.
Where any person ordered to do any work for the purpose of abating a nuisance has failed or refused to do that work, and the work has been done by the employees of the city, the cost thereof may be collected by lien against that person and that person's property. Each lien shall be prepared by the department charged with the duty of abating or removing the nuisance, shall be signed by the city clerk, and shall be delivered to the DeKalb County Tax Commissioner for collection as other liens are collected. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-06, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-5. Refusal to comply with an order to abate a nuisance.
The failure or refusal of a person ordered to abate a nuisance after a hearing, or upon a summary abatement, shall, in addition to subjecting the person to punishment for contempt if the order is issued by the judge of the municipal court, constitute an offense that, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. Each day's failure or refusal to comply with the order, after the expiration of the time allowed to remove or abate the nuisance, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-06, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Secs. 16-6—16-22. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 16-23. Drug and illegal gambling houses, houses of prostitution and other disorderly houses.
(a)	Any dwelling, building, or structure used for prostitution, illegal gambling, or in connection with the commission of drug crimes is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. However, consistent with state public policy, this chapter shall not apply to any publicly owned cultural facility pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-1-8. 
(b)	It is the affirmative duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, or structure within city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, or structure in conformance with applicable codes under state law, and all ordinances in force within the city. 
(c)	An owner or party-in-interest of a dwelling, building or structure shall not be subject to proceedings described in subsection (e), (f), (h), (i) or (j) of this section if it is established that the owner or party-in-interest: 
(1)	Did not know and could not reasonably have known of the public nuisance described in subsection (a) of this section occurring on the subject premises; 
(2)	Does not hold the subject property for the benefit of or as nominee for any person whose conduct gave rise to the public nuisance described in subsection (a) of this section, and, if the owner or party-in-interest acquired the interest through any such person, the owner or party-in-interest acquired it as a bona fide purchaser for value without knowingly taking part in the public nuisance; or 
(3)	Acquired ownership or legal interest after the completion of the public nuisance giving rise to proceedings under this chapter or at the time the title was acquired, was reasonably without cause to believe that the dwelling, building or structure was subject to be deemed a public nuisance or likely to become subject to being deemed a public nuisance under this chapter. 
(d)	The building official shall have all powers to carry out and effectuate the purpose of this chapter as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11. 
(e)	The building official shall make an investigation or inspection of a dwelling, building, or structure whenever a charge is made that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of activities described in subsection (a) of this section; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. If the building official's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of activities described in subsection (a) of this section; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the building official may either: 
(1)	Issue a citation for violation of any applicable state minimum standard codes, building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance. The citation shall notify the owner and parties of the violation and a time frame for compliance; and 
(2)	Issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. Service of the complaint shall be in the manner as mandated by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the building official to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the dwelling, building or structure is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(f)	After notice and a hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (e)(2) of this section, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of activities described in subsection (a) of this section; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order of abatement: 
(1)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, the order of abatement shall require the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, shall require the taking of reasonable measures designed to prevent the recurrence of the nuisance activity described in subsection (a) of this section in light of the magnitude of the harm caused by the nuisance. Those measures may include, but are not limited to, making improvements to real estate and installing lighting to enhance security, the hiring of licensed and insured security personnel, the hiring of a receiver, the initiation and execution of eviction proceedings against tenants engaged in illegal activity. 
(2)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)	The court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by county tax records, affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided by state law, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the county. 
(g)	The court may authorize the issuance of ex parte administrative search warrants reasonably calculated to determine whether the nuisance has been abated or whether the order of the court has been obeyed. 
(h)	If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the building official may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with illegal activities or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
After a hearing, if it is deemed by the court that this section has not been complied with, such owner or other person is given five days from written notice, to comply and if he fails or refuses to do so, the building official shall thereupon cause the work to be done. 
(i)	If the building official has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. 
(1)	The city, the building official and the city council are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; and 
(2)	The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(j)	The lien provided for in subsection (i)(2) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g), as amended. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(k)	The city council may waive and release any lien imposed on property pursuant to subsection (i)(2) of this section if the owner of such property enters into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property; demonstrates the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation; fully completes the rehabilitation; and fulfills all terms of the contract. 
(l)	The city council may appropriate revenue as necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
(m)	Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court of the county, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court of the county under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29, as may hereinafter be amended. Notice of an appeal shall act as a supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-02, att. A(18-3), 2-26-2013)
Secs. 16-24—16-35. Reserved.
Sec. 16-36. Rules for the use and conduct on and in city parks, trails and greenspace.
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to secure the quiet, orderly and suitable use and enjoyment of City of Brookhaven parks, trails, and greenspaces. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words shall have the definitions assigned in this subsection. All other words shall bear their usual and customary meaning, unless defined elsewhere in this Code or by state statute. 
Horse means a horse, mule, donkey, llama, alpaca, or other ungulate or ruminant that is used to transport people, equipment, or materials. 
Motorized recreational vehicle means any self-propelled, off the road or all terrain vehicle including, but not limited to minibike, motorcycle, go cart, trail bike, dune buggy, all terrain cycle. 
Pet means any animal that is tamed and domesticated and kept as a companion. 
Pollutant means any substance, solid, liquid or gas, which could cause contamination of air, land or water so as to create or cause a nuisance or render unclean or noxious or impure so as to actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety, or welfare, or that of wildlife or vegetation. 
Property means any land, waters, facilities or possessions of the City of Brookhaven. 
Responsible person means the parent, guardian, or person having lawful custody and control of a minor. 
Roller skater means any person riding or propelling oneself by human power or gravity on wheeled devices that are worn on a person's feet or stood upon by a person. This definition shall not include skate boards or other wheeled devices that are not affixed to the person's feet by laces or brackets. 
Smoke/smoking means the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or gas from any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted tobacco or plant product. Smoking also includes carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a roadway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(c)	Public use regulations.
(1)	Hours of operation for parks and greenspaces. Parks and greenspaces shall be open to the public daily from dawn to dusk, local time. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in a park at any other time without a use permit, except when the park area or facility is otherwise designated by the council. Overnight use shall be unlawful. 
(2)	Hours of operation for the Peachtree Creek Greenway. The Peachtree Creek Greenway shall be open from 6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. each day. Overnight use shall be unlawful. 
(3)	Drug and alcohol use. It shall be unlawful for any person 
a.	To use, possess, or sell any controlled substance in violation of state statutes. 
b.	Serve, possess, or consume any alcoholic beverage within a park, except pursuant to a special permit issued by the city. 
(4)	Disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct as defined under state law, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(5)	Selling of food items. It shall be unlawful to sell any food items except by special permit issued by the city. 
(6)	Tents, canopies, or temporary shelters. It shall be unlawful to erect, use, establish tents, canopies, tarpaulins, or other temporary shelter except by special permit issued by the city. 
(7)	Open fires, smokers, or grills. It shall be unlawful to ignite, light, or utilize any open fire, smoker or grill, except in permanent installations provided at the park or trail for such purpose. 
(8)	Animals. It shall be unlawful to bring, allow or otherwise accompany any horse, or undomesticated animal on the Peachtree Creek Greenway, or into any park of the city. 
(9)	Pets. All pets must be on leash at all times while in a park, greenspace, or on the Peachtree Creek Greenway unless within a designated and fenced "dog park" established by the city council. No leash shall be more than six feet in length and must be in the owner's control at all times. Any pet not on a leash shall be deemed "running at large" as defined by the Code of the city and the owner of such pet subject to citation, adjudication and punishment as permitted by law. 
(10)	Vandalism and damage to landscaped areas. It shall be unlawful to commit any act of vandalism or to recklessly harm any park property, amenity, landscaping, hardscaping, equipment, or amenity. 
(11)	Fishing. It shall be unlawful to fish in any stream, river, creek, lake or other body of water, within any park, greenspace or adjacent to any trail, unless the fisherperson shall use monofilament line, of not more than ten pounds breaking strength, and a single unbarbed hook, using only natural baits. No lures, jigs, or other artificial devices may be utilized. Fishing is prohibited under all circumstances along the Peachtree Creek Greenway. 
(12)	Roller skating. Roller skating shall be allowed on paved surfaces only. The use of any other type of wheeled device or vehicle shall be unlawful. 
(13)	Smoking. It shall be unlawful to smoke or use smokeless tobacco products. 
(14)	Swimming or wading. It shall be unlawful to swim or wade in any stream, river, lake or other natural body of water. 
(15)	Vehicles. It shall be unlawful to use, operate, or ride any motorized vehicle except in designated parking lots and spaces. This prohibition shall not apply to scooters or bicycles powered by electric motors. 
(d)	[Enforcement.]The Brookhaven Police Department, the DeKalb County Sheriff's Department, the DeKalb County Police Department and any other sworn law enforcement agency or employee of any of the enumerated agencies or other agency shall be empowered to enforce this section by citation to the Municipal Court of the City of Brookhaven, where upon conviction such person may be punished as the court directs pursuant to section 1-11 of this Code. 
(e)	[Other rules and regulations.] The council shall have the right to adopt by resolution other rules and regulations related to this section. Such other rules and regulations shall not be a basis for citation, though a violation of such rules and regulations will provide good and sufficient justification for a law enforcement officer to conduct a reasonable inquiry into the conduct of the violation and whether other violations of law may have occurred or be occurring. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04-01, § 1, 4-9-2019)
Secs. 16-37—16-49. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTION
Sec. 16-50. Adopted codes.
(a)	Generally. As future new editions and/or amendments of the code listed below are adopted by the board of community affairs of the state department of community affairs, it shall become a part of or replacement for the adopted code, rules and regulations or standards and shall become enforceable as prescribed without separate adoption by the city. All new construction, installations, repairs or alterations shall be in conformance with the current edition of the following codes and referenced appendixes with state amendments as currently adopted by the board of community affairs of the state department of community affairs: International Property Maintenance Code. 
(b)	Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the above-stated codes shall be considered an integral part of the code without separate adoption. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by a code test, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall govern. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(c)	Appendices. The appendices included in any code adopted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section are not intended for enforcement unless specifically referenced in this chapter or specifically included in this Code. 
(d)	Referenced codes and standards. The adopted state codes adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such adoption. Where differences occur between the provisions of this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-02, att. A(18-5), 2-26-2013)
Sec. 16-51. International Property Maintenance Code.
A certain document, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 16-52. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-02, att. A(18-6), 2-26-2013)
Sec. 16-52. Revisions to the International Property Maintenance Code.
The following revisions shall be made to the International Property Maintenance Code: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City. 
Section 103.5. Insert: As adopted by the city council. 
Section 302.4. Insert: 12 inches. 
Section 304.14. Insert: April 1 to October 1. 
Section 602.3. Insert: October 15 to March 15. 
Section 602.4. Insert: October 15 to March 15. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-02, att. A(18-7), 2-26-2013)
Secs. 16-53—16-77. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. FORECLOSURE REGISTRY
Secs. 16-78—16-97. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. MULTIFAMILY RENTAL HOUSING
Sec. 16-98. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official means the chief building inspector for the city. 
Certified building inspector means any person inspecting for compliance with this article who is certified pursuant to section 16-102. 
Code compliance certificate means a certificate, executed by a certified building inspector and stating compliance with those minimum standards described in the inspection report attached thereto. 
Inspection report means the report attached to the code compliance certificate describing minimum requirements for inspection of each multifamily rental unit in the premises. 
Lease means any written agreement which sets forth any and all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units. 
Multifamily rental dwelling means any structure, building, or other facility containing four or more multifamily rental units that is leased to a tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to, multiple-family dwellings, multiple-family apartment units, boardinghouses, roominghouses, group homes, and flats. 
Multifamily rental unit means any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multifamily rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one tenant, group of tenants, or family under one lease, or under terms of joint and severable liability. 
Occupant means all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a multifamily rental unit. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm, corporation or other entity having a legal interest in a premises. 
Owner-occupied means any part of a structure used as living quarters by the owner of said structure where other parts of the structure are used as multifamily rental units. Example: Two-family dwelling, owner occupies one flat; roominghouse, owner occupies one unit. 
Premises means any lot or piece of land that includes a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental units. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03-07, § 2(18-52), 4-9-2013)
Sec. 16-99. Fee and certificate required.
(a)	Occupational tax. All owners of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units within the city that receive income for use of four or more such multifamily rental units and meet the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 for having a location or office within the city shall be subject to an occupational tax as provided in chapter 15 and shall provide to the city, prior to April 15th, of each calendar year. Said code compliance certificate shall be certified by the owner and the certified building inspector that all multifamily rental units have been inspected and are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate and inspection report. New multifamily rental developments are exempt from the interior evaluation requirements described herein, provided proper permits are obtained from the city, five years after the date of the certificate of occupancy issued by the city. 
(b)	Inspection. Upon initial inspection of such multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units, should a certified building inspector determine that further work is necessary to comply with the minimum standards set forth herein, an acceptable plan shall be submitted to the building official, outlining the time and scope of work necessary to bring the units into compliance. If such plan is accepted by the building official as reasonable and justified, an extension may be granted for up to one year for completion of repairs and compliance with this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, no extension shall be granted for noncompliance of life safety code issues and any such multifamily rental units containing such noncompliant life safety issues shall not be leased until brought into full compliance with the minimum standards contained in this chapter and re-certification provide to the building official by the owner. 
(c)	Code compliance certificate. Each owner shall submit a code compliance certificate annually, with their occupational tax certificate renewal. Such subsequent code compliance certificate shall cover at least one half of the multifamily rental units in the premises, provided all multifamily rental units contained in the premises shall be inspected, at a minimum, every two years. All multifamily rental units inspected shall be listed individually on the code compliance certificate submitted to the city by the owner. 
(d)	Written record of inspection. Furthermore, each owner shall keep a written record of all inspections for each multifamily rental unit including the date of the inspection, items inspected and all violations, if any, observed. In addition, the most recent copy of the inspection reports for the multifamily rental units shall also be maintained at the premises. Such records shall be presented to the city within ten business days after such request is made in writing to the owner at the contact address listed on the code of compliance certificate. Failure to provide such records shall nullify the code compliance certificate for those multifamily dwelling units included in the request. 
(e)	Authority to audit and inspection warrants. The building official or its designee shall have the authority to inspect the interior of those units that are included in each annual code compliance certificate submitted to the city pursuant to subsection (c) of this section when there is probable cause to believe there has been a violation of this chapter or other applicable code sections. Said inspection may, at the discretion of the building official, include such number of submitted units included in the code compliance certificate as determined by the building official or its designee. Once determined that an audit inspection will be conducted, the building official shall give written notice to the certified building inspector issuing the code compliance certificate, the owner and/or the property management company of the date of the inspection which inspection shall take place, which shall be no sooner than seven days from the date of the notice and shall be conducted on from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. during weekdays, other than nationally recognized holidays. The written notice shall state that the owner and/or property management company shall have the right to refuse the inspection and the building official or designee's right to seek issuance of an inspection warrant in the event of any such refusal. The owner, the certified building inspection or a member of the property management company shall be available to accompany the building official during the inspection. In the event the owner and/or property management company refuses inspection, the building official or designee shall have the right to seek issuance of an inspection warrant from a judge of the municipal court in accordance with section 7-171. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03-07, § 2(18-53), 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2014-04-05, § 18-53, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 2014-09-01, 9-22-2014; Ord. No. 2023-02-04, § I, 2-28-2023; Ord. No. 2024-11-08, § 1(Attch.), 11-19-2024)
Sec. 16-100. Failure to provide code compliance certificate.
(a)	Failure to provide the code compliance certificate as provided herein shall be a violation of this chapter and is subject to those penalties contained herein and in section 1-11. 
(b)	Further, said failure, upon a judicial determination, shall be a condition constituting probable cause, and may subject said multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental units to inspection by the building official, at a fee as determined by the governing body of the city, that includes all costs of such inspection by the city. Said inspection by the city, if required, shall be performed at the sole cost of the owner and failure to pay said cost shall result in a lien being placed on the premises as provided for in city Code. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city from enforcement of the state minimum standard codes as provided in this chapter during the city's inspection of the multifamily rental units. 
(c)	Failure to pay the occupational tax as provided herein shall be a violation of chapter 15 and is subject to those penalties set forth in chapter 15 and as otherwise provided in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03-07, § 2(18-54), 4-9-2013)
Sec. 16-101. Penalty for false certification and false inspection.
(a)	An owner who knowingly furnishes a code compliance certificate to the city which contains a false certification that any multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental unit inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter for each multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit for which the code compliance certificate is shown to be false and can be fined by the court for each violation up to $1,000.00 for each dwelling or unit. 
(b)	A certified building inspector who knowingly, recklessly, or negligently furnishes an inspection report which contains fraudulent information that a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit meets the minimum standards of this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code, may be subject to the provisions of section 1-11 and may be fined, by the court for each violation up to $1,000.00 for each dwelling or unit, each dwelling or unit shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the certified building inspector's right to submit inspection reports to the city shall be suspended for a stated prior of time, up to five years. 
(c)	A property manager who knowingly furnishes a code compliance certificate to the city which contains a false certification that any multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter for each multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit for which the code compliance certificate is shown to be false and can be fined by the court for each violation up to $1,000.00 for each dwelling or unit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03-07, § 2(18-55), 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2014-04-05, § 18-55, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Sec. 16-102. Certified building inspector requirements.
All inspectors wishing to submit or participate in the city's multifamily rental housing evaluation program must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	The inspector must be a licensed design professional (architect or engineer) or hold one of the following certifications from the International Code Council (ICC): property maintenance and housing inspector, housing rehabilitation inspector, building inspector, building plan examiner or commercial combination inspector. 
(2)	The inspector must submit a copy of his business license or occupational tax certificate and certificate of insurance of liability insurance. 
(3)	The inspector must meet with the building official to present the qualifications noted in subsections (1) and (2) of this section for approval prior to performing any inspections pursuant to this chapter. Upon completion of this meeting, an inspector determined to be qualified by the building official will be placed on a list of approved certified building inspectors to be maintained by the city. 
(4)	From time to time, mandatory meetings will be called by the city building official which all certified building inspectors participating in the program must attend, except as permitted on an individual basis by the building official due to extenuating circumstances. Ample notice will be provided by the city to the contact address provided by the certified building inspector no less than two weeks prior to the date of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03-07, § 2(18-56), 4-9-2013)
Sec. 16-103. Interior evaluations of multifamily rental units.
Interior evaluations will be conducted to ensure compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code, the Life Safety Code (existing provisions) and the International Fire Code and other referenced standards contained herein and, at a minimum, will include inspections of the following items. The 2006 International Property Maintenance Code and the 2006 International Fire Code, or the latest version of the same as updated periodically by the governing body of the code, are the referenced codes. 
(1)	Apartment numbers identification posted in accordance with IPMC section 304.3. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the public or private street or road fronting the multifamily dwelling unit. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). 
(2)	Flooring is an impervious surface in the kitchen and bath areas in accordance with IPMC 305.3. 
(3)	All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition with no chipping or flaking paint or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions. 
(4)	Hot and cold water at kitchen baths and laundry rooms is provided in accordance with IPMC section 505.1. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. 
(5)	Privacy for bathrooms shall be provided in accordance with IPMC section 503.1. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling. 
(6)	Heating facilities are in good working order in accordance with IPMC section 602.2 and 603.1. No unvented heating appliances in sleeping rooms. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section (603.1). All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
(7)	Garbage disposal facilities are in accordance with IPMC sections 307.3, 307.3.1 and 307.3.2. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers. (307.3.1) The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each multifamily rental unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each multifamily dwelling unit; or an approved leak-proof, covered, outside garbage container. (307.3.2) The owner of every multifamily rental unit producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal. 
(8)	Smoke detector devices shall be provided in accordance with IPMC section 704.2. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
a.	On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
b.	In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
c.	In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
d.	Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
e.	Per O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40. 
f.	For multifamily rental units constructed before 1987: At least one battery operated between the living and sleeping areas. 
g.	Unless over three or more stories, detectors shall be installed within each multifamily rental unit between living and sleeping areas. Such detectors shall be continuously powered by the building's electrical system. When activated, the detector shall initiate an alarm which is audible in sleeping rooms of that living unit. 
h.	For multifamily rental units constructed after 1987, detectors must be located on every level and outside of the sleeping area. 
i.	For multifamily rental units constructed after 2007, detectors must be installed per IPMC including one on every level, outside of the sleeping area and inside of every sleeping room. 
(9)	Window spaces for light, ventilation, operable and emergency escape shall conform with IPMC sections 304.13.1, 304.13.2, 304.14, 304.18.2, 402.1 and 702.4. (304.13.1) All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. (304.13.2) Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. (304.14) During the period from April 1 to October 1, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. (304.18.2) Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet (1,828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device. (402.1) Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet (914 mm) from the exterior of the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. (702.4) Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following: (i) required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools; (ii) bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
(10)	Plumbing facilities to be maintained in a safe working condition in accordance with IPMC section 502.1. Every multifamily rental unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
(11)	Electrical devices, service equipment and luminaries are in safe working condition with no exposed wires in accordance with IPMC sections 604 and 605. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and section 605. Multifamily rental units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the defects are to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. (605) All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire. GFCI devices are provided in required locations dependent on the time of construction, repair or remodel generally in accordance with the following standards: 
a.	1971 Receptacles within 15 feet of pool walls. 
b.	1973 All outdoor receptacles. 
c.	1975 Bathrooms, 120-volt pool lights, and fountain equipment. 
d.	1978 Garage receptacles. 
e.	1981 Whirlpools and tubs. 
f.	1984 Distance of GFCI protection extended to 20 feet from pool walls. 
g.	1987 Unfinished basements. 
h.	1987 Kitchen countertop receptacles within six feet of sink. 
i.	1990 Crawlspaces (with exception for sump pumps or other dedicated equipment). 
j.	1993 Wet bar countertops within six feet of sink. 
k.	1993 Any receptacle replaced in an area presently requiring GFCI. 
l.	1996 All kitchen counters—not just those within six feet of sink. 
m.	2005 Receptacles near laundry and utility sinks within six feet. 
(12)	Door units, jambs and hardware are in good working order in accordance with IPMC sections 304.13, 304.18, 305.3 and 305.6 and required opening protective devices be maintained in an operative condition. In accordance with IPMC section 703.2 (304.13), every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. (304.18) Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. (305.3) All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good condition. Loose plaster and decayed wood shall be corrected. (305.6) Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. (703.2) Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable. 
(13)	Interior stairs, handrails and guards are maintained in a sound condition and good repair in accordance with IPMC sections 305.4, 305.5, and 306.1. (305.4) Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition. (305.5) Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good repair. (306.1) Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have handrails. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high or more than 42 inches (1,067 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. 
(14)	Interior floors, walls and ceilings are maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in sanitary condition in accordance with IPMC section 305. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. Defective surface conditions shall be corrected. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition. 
(15)	Occupancy limitations per bedroom in accordance with IPMC section 404. Dwelling units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet (2,134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet (914 mm) between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet (2,134 mm). 
a.	Every bedroom shall comply with the requirements of sections 404.4.1 through 404.4.5. 
b.	404.4.1 Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m2 ) of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 m2 ) of additional floor area for each occupant thereof. 
c.	404.4.2 Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces. Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms. 
d.	Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story. 
e.	Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
f.	Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of the IPMC. 
g.	Multifamily rental units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table 404.5. 
TABLE 404.5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS 


For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m2 
a See IPMC section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
b See IPMC section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. 
h.	The minimum occupancy area required by Table 404.5 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with IPMC section 404.4. 
i.	Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
(16)	Insect and rodent infestation in accordance with IPMC section 308.1. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(17)	Means of egress shall be provided in accordance with IPMC section 702. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code. The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code shall be unobstructed. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
(18)	Fire extinguisher shall be present and tagged or inspection current in accordance with IFC 906.1 and NFPA 10 (906.1). Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in the following locations: (1.) In new and existing Group A, B, E, F, H, I , M, R-1, R-2, R-4 and S occupancies and; (2.) (NFPA 10) Fire extinguishers must be within 75 foot travel distance of the most remote location of a dwelling. (906.2) Portable fire extinguishers shall be selected, installed and maintained in accordance with this section and NFPA 10. 
(19)	Sprinkler heads clear and unobstructed. NFPA 25 Sprinkler heads must be free from dust debris paint and obstructions that would otherwise inhibit their operation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03-07, § 2(18-57), 4-9-2013)
Sec. 16-104. Exterior and publicly accessible evaluations of multifamily properties.
(a)	Exterior evaluations will be conducted evaluating for compliance with the latest edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, the Life Safety Code (existing provisions) and the International Fire Code and other referenced standards contained herein. 
(b)	All premises containing multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units will be subject to an evaluation of the exterior, public and mechanical areas in accordance with policy approved by the city. After the exterior inspection, the owner of the premises will be presented with a report containing the findings of the city's inspection. Compliance must be achieved in a timeframe as specified in the exterior inspection report. 
(c)	Failure by the owner to properly address the exterior inspection report findings in the timeframe outlined therein as presented shall be a violation of this article and is subject to those penalties provided by the International Property Maintenance Code, allowed by law, contained herein or in section 16-23. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03-07, § 2(18-58), 4-9-2013)
Secs. 16-105—16-121. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. WEEDS AND GRASS
Sec. 16-122. Maximum height of weeds, grass, etc.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of improved property or previously improved property in the city, whether zoned residential, commercial, industrial or other, to have, place or allow grass, weeds and/or other undergrowth to exceed the height of 12 inches or more on such property, including but not limited to, the front, side or rear yard, or right-of-way. Notwithstanding the above, grass, weeds and/or other undergrowth of a height of 12 inches or more are declared to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-20, § 1(18-101), 12-2-2014)
Sec. 16-123. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-12-06, § 2, adopted Dec. 12, 2017, repealed § 16-123, which pertained to notice to abate; violation of section 16-122 and derived from Ord. No. 2014-11-20, § 1(18-102), adopted Dec. 2, 2014. 
Sec. 16-124. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-12-06, § 2, adopted Dec. 12, 2017, repealed § 16-124, which pertained to hearing and abatement and derived from Ord. No. 2014-11-20, § 1(18-103), adopted Dec. 2, 2014. 
Sec. 16-125. Remedies.
The remedies provided in this article are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this chapter. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the city, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance; and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-20, § 1(18-104), 12-2-2014)
Sec. 16-126. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-12-06, § 2, adopted Dec. 12, 2017, repealed § 16-126, which pertained to violations and contempt of abatement order and derived from Ord. No. 2014-11-20, § 1(18-105), adopted Dec. 2, 2014. 
Secs. 16-127—16-150. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. NOISE
Sec. 16-151. Definitions.
All terminology used in this article, not defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
A-weighting is the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity. 
Background sound level is the total sound pressure level in the area of interest excluding the noise source of interest. 
Commercial or business property category is all property which is used primarily for the sale of merchandise or goods, or for the performances of service, or for office or clerical work. Any property zoned multi-use, as that term may be used in chapter 27 shall be deemed commercial or business property under this chapter. 
Construction is any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures. 
Daytime hours shall mean the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday, 7:00 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. Saturday, and 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Sunday. 
Decibel (dB) is the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location. 
dBA is the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
dBC is the C-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
Emergency is any occurrence or set or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work is any work or action performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Impulsive sound is a sound having a duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
Industrial or manufacturing property category is any property which is used primarily for manufacturing or processing. 
Institutional property category is any property which is used primarily for public purposes such as city hall or a city park. 
Muffler is a sound-dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine where such a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment. 
Multi-family dwelling is any building or other shelter that has been divided into separate units to house more than one family. 
Nighttime shall mean the hours of 11:00 p.m. 7:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, 12:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Saturday, and 12:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Sunday. 
Noise is any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Noise disturbance is any sound that: 
(1)	Endangers the safety or health of any person; 
(2)	Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
(3)	Endangers personal or real property. 
Noise-sensitive facility means any facility whose operations may be detrimentally impacted by excessive sound levels. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, hospitals, and places of worship. 
Octave band is all the components in a sound spectrum whose frequencies are between two sine waves components separated by an octave. 
Real property line is the line, including its vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another. 
Residential property category is all property established as a residential zoning category by chapter 27 of the ordinances of the City of Brookhaven, except for multi-use zoning categories where there may be residential components. 
Sound level meter (SLM) is an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to type 1 or type 2 standards as specified in ANSI Standard S1.4-1983 or the latest version thereof. 
Sound pressure level (SPL) is 20 multiplied by the logarithm, to the base ten, of the measured sound pressure divided by the sound pressure associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01-02, § 16-302, 1-12-2016)
Sec. 16-152. Sound level limitations.
(a)	No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth in table 1 when measured at or within the real property line of the receiving property using the slow response setting unless otherwise noted. Such a sound source would constitute a noise disturbance. 
Table 1 Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property


(b)	Prohibited conduct.
(1)	Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated, any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph, sound, amplifier, or other machines or devices producing, reproducing or amplifying sound and/or at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible and heard or cause vibrations to property or person at or more than the specified distances above from the building, structure or motor vehicle on private property, unless the property boundaries from which the sound originates is a greater distance than those specified in subsection (a) of this section. In that event, the sound shall not be plainly audible beyond the property boundary. 
(2)	Human-produced sound. It is unlawful for any person to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance at or more than the specified distances in subsection (a) of this section from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest. 
(3)	Party noise. It is unlawful for any person in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or event to produce noise in such a manner so as to cause such noise to be plainly audible at or more than the specified distances in subsection (a) of this section from the building or structure from which the party noise is emanating or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits on which the party or social event is located, whichever farthest. 
(4)	Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated, any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for production or reproduction of a sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at or more than the specified distances in subsection (a) of this section from the building, structure, or motor vehicle on private property. 
(5)	Use or ignition of fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use, ignite or permit to be used or operated any fireworks as defined in O.C.G.A. 25-10-1 producing noise in such a manner so as to cause such noise to be plainly audible on any day before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:30 pm and up to including the time of 11:59 pm, except as permitted by State Statute, and on July 2, 2016, for which no fireworks will be permitted before 10:00 a.m. 
(c)	In a multi-family dwelling, it shall be unlawful to create or permit to be created any noise that exceeds the daytime limit of 75 dBA and the nighttime limit of 55 dBA as measured from the closest neighbor's dwelling. 
(d)	In places of public entertainment having a capacity of 5,000 or more persons, it shall be unlawful to create or permit to be created any noise that exceeds an average of 95 dBC in any ten-minute period from 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and from 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. for events commencing on Friday or Saturday. The sound level limit for all other times shall be 55 dBC. The sound shall be measured at a point which is found by traveling a straight line distance from the center of the sound board through the center rear of the facility a distance of 500 feet or to the property line of the facility, whichever is less. The measurement assumes that the sound board is not more than 100 feet from the center stage. The 500-foot measurement shall be reduced one foot for each foot that the sound board is more than 100 feet from center stage. 
(e)	In interpreting and applying the times and values in table 1, it is the intent of the city council that the times be interpreted to provide maximum protection from undesirable noise possible. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01-02, § 16-303, 1-12-2016; Ord. No. 2016-06-01, § 1, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2019-02-03, § I, 2-12-2019)
Sec. 16-153. Exemptions.
(a)	Noise generated from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events shall be exempt from the provisions of subsections 16-152(a) and (b). 
(b)	The following are exempt from the sound level limits of subsections 16-152(a), (b), and (c): 
(1)	Sound by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; 
(2)	Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building, provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if intermittent; 
(3)	Noise from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if the sound is intermittent; 
(4)	The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; 
(5)	Organized band and/or sports league activity sponsored by a school or the City of Brookhaven that is otherwise in compliance with the code of ordinances of the City of Brookhaven, Georgia; 
(6)	Unamplified bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with religious services between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.; 
(7)	Emergency work; 
(8)	Events with amplified sound that are operating within the time and volume parameters set forth in an approved special administrative permit; 
(Ord. No. 2016-01-02, § 16-304, 1-12-2016)
Sec. 16-154. Restricted uses and activities.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1)—(2)a. and the exceptions above, the following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth below: 
(1)	Non-commercial or non-industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall not be operated between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or on Saturday or Sunday before the hour of 9:00 a.m. At all other times, the limits set forth in subsection (1)—(2)a. do not apply to non-commercial or non-industrial power tools and landscaping and year maintenance equipment, provided that all motorized equipment is operated with a functioning muffler. 
(2)	Commercial or industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall be operated with a muffler. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall not be operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a residential property line, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, unless: 
a.	Such activities are deemed emergency work, or 
b.	Such activities meet the limits set forth in subsection (1)—(2)a. 
At all other times, the limits set forth in subsection (1)—(2)a. do not apply to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment. 
(3)	Construction and demolition activity shall not be performed between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or after the hour of 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, unless: 
a.	Such activities are deemed emergency work; or 
b.	Such activities meet the limits set forth in subsection (1)—(2)a. 
This provision shall not apply if the chief of police determines that the loss or inconvenience that would result to any party in interest is of such a nature as to warrant special consideration. In such cases, the chief of police may grant a renewable permit for a period not to exceed ten days for this work to be done within the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(4)	Domesticated animals may not make any vocalizations (including barking, baying, howling, crying, or making any other noise) for more than ten minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if intermittent. 
(5)	The collection of trash or refuse in residential districts is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(6)	No person shall operate, play, or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device in such a manner as to create a continuing noise disturbance at 50 feet from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01-02, § 16-305, 1-12-2016; Ord. No. 2019-02-03, § I, 2-12-2019)
Sec. 16-155. Procedures for the determination of sound levels.
(a)	Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including but not limited to, design, maximum and fluctuating rates. All noise measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the impacted site, unless otherwise directed in this article. When instrumentation cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this article, noise measurements are measurements are measured on the A- or C-weighted sound scale, as applicable, of a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI. 
(b)	Measurements shall be taken by police officers appropriately trained in the use of a sound level meter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01-02, § 16-306, 1-12-2016)
Sec. 16-156. Special variances.
(a)	The chief of police or the chief's designated representative shall have the authority, consistent with this article, to grant special variances. 
(b)	Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this article shall file an application with the chief of police or the chief's designated representative. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound into compliance with this article would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on the other persons. Notice of an application for a special variance shall be given by the chief or the chief's representative to persons who frequent the area of the sound or activity and who may be adversely affected by the granting of the variance. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the special variance may file a statement with the chief or the chief's representative containing any information to support such individual's claim. 
(c)	In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the chief or the chief's designated representative shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community, and other persons of not granting the special variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impact of granting the special variance. Applicants for special variances may be required to submit any information the chief or the chief's representative may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the chief or the chief's representative shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the special variance. 
(d)	Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this article regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special variance was granted. 
(e)	Application for extension of time limits specified in special variances or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial special variances. 
(f)	The chief of police or the chief's designated representative may issue guidelines approved by city council defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a special variance and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether or not to grant a special variance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01-02, § 16-307, 1-12-2016)
Sec. 16-157. Enforcement procedures; miscellaneous.
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city may prosecute noise related violations by issuance of a city ordinance citation, in which case, the penalty for a violation shall be as set forth in section 1-11 of this Code. In addition to issuing any penalty as provided in section 1-11, or in lieu thereof, the municipal court judge may issue an order requiring immediate abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this section. 
(1)	Notwithstanding the generally punishments established above, the fine for a first conviction of this Chapter shall be not less than $200.00, in addition to any other penalty imposed by the Court, however, the total fine shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(2)	Upon a second conviction within 12 months, measured from the date of the conviction, the Court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00, in addition to any other penalty imposed by the Court, however, the total fine shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(3)	Upon a third conviction within 24 months, measured from the date of the earliest conviction, the Court shall impose a fine of $1,000.00, in addition to any other penalty imposed by the Court. 
(4)	Upon a third conviction within 24 months, measured from the date of the earliest conviction, if the offender has been granted or has applied for an alcohol license as a restaurant or as a late night establishment, such license shall automatically be suspended as of the date of the conviction, and proceedings initiated to revoke such alcohol license in accordance with the City of Brookhaven Alcohol Ordinance. The clerk of municipal court shall refer such third convictions to the attention of the city manager or her or his designee for action consistent with this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01-02, § 16-308, 1-12-2016; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Secs. 16-158—16-192. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. VEGETATION
Sec. 16-193. Vegetation and debris.
(a)	Vegetation. There shall be no dead or hazardous trees, shrubs, ground cover or weeds likely to harbor vermin or insects, restrict or impede access to or public use of adjacent sidewalks, paths, trails and streets, obstruct traffic-control signs and devices and fire hydrants, or pose a risk of physical injury to the public. 
(b)	Debris. There shall not be maintained on a property for more than seven calendar days any used or damaged lumber, junk, trash, debris, scrap metal, concrete, sand, asphalt, cans, bottles, tires, salvage materials, boxes, containers, bins, and abandoned, discarded, inoperative or unusable furniture, stove, refrigerator, freezer, sink, toilet, cabinet or other household fixtures, yard waste or equipment stored so as to be visible from public street, alley or from an adjoining property unless appropriate permits have been obtained from the county. Nothing herein shall preclude the placement of stacked firewood for use on the premises in the side or rear yards of the premises. 
(c)	Shared property. Where parking in open areas is used jointly for the benefit of two or more owners or tenants, the responsibility for maintaining these parking areas free of garbage and trash shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owners and tenants. 
(d)	Invasive vegetation. Invasive plant species on premises and exterior property shall be maintained whereby damage to existing trees and encroachment onto adjacent properties is prevented. Invasive plant species within the city are defined by the Georgia Exotic Pest Plant Council (EPPC) Invasive Plant List, which is maintained by the Center for Invasive Species and Ecosystem Health, University of Georgia: https://www.gaeppc.org/list/. The list includes, but is not limited to, English Ivy (Hedera helix), Chinese Wisteria (Wisteria sinensis), Kudzu (Pueraria montana var. lobata), Elaeagnus umbellata, Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima), all Privet species (Ligustrum spp.), and all Bamboo species other than the native species River Cane, Switch Cane (Arundinaria spp.). 
(Ord. No. 2019-02-03, § I, 2-12-2019; Ord. No. 2021-06-04, § I(Attch.), 6-29-2021)
ARTICLE IX. DERELICT PROPERTY
Sec. 16-200. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Brookhaven Derelict Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-201. Definitions.
As used in this article, the term: 
Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property-maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real-property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act that is a violation of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act". 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface without prior authorization from the owner or occupant of the property. 
Governing authority means the City Council of the City of Brookhaven, Georgia. 
Interested party means: 
(1)	The "owner"; 
(2)	Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(3)	Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(4)	Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; and 
(5)	Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, interested party shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. 
Municipality means the City of Brookhaven, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
Public officer means the city manager, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by article, and any officer or employee of the city, specifically including but not limited to code enforcement officers, to whom he delegates such authority. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated that create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date that the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-202. Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon.
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city or such laws and ordinances that regulate and prohibit activities on private property and that declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use private property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-203. Declaration of public nuisance.
Every dwelling, building, or structure within the city that (i) is constructed or maintained in violation of applicable codes in force within the city; (ii) is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; (iii) poses an imminent harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; (iv) is vacant and used in the commission of drug crimes; (v) is occupied and used repeatedly for the commission of illegal activities, including facilitating organized crime or criminal enterprises, after written notice to the owner of such activities conducted therein; (vi) is abandoned; or (vii) otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, is hereby declared a public nuisance. Every private property within the city on which is being regularly conducted any activity or land use in violation of applicable laws and ordinances, including the zoning ordinance of this city, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Property that may be deemed esthetically substandard or deteriorating shall not meet the definition of a public nuisance unless the overall condition or use of the property results in impaired health, safety, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-204. Powers of city manager or their designee.
(a)	In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, the city manager or his designee to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)	Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists. 
(2)	To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys. 
(3)	To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)	To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(b)	In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, the city manager or his designee(s) may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions declared to constitute a public health or safety hazard or general nuisance, and to seek enforcement of such citations before the municipal court prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by other summary proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-205. Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal.
(a)	Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions including but not limited to: 
(1)	Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)	Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)	Dilapidation; 
(4)	Disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(5)	Structural defects that render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; 
(6)	Uncleanliness; or 
(7)	The presence of graffiti that is visible from adjoining public or private property. 
(b)	If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall file a complaint in rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(c)	If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered; and, provided further, that if the unsatisfactory condition is limited solely to the presence of graffiti, the dwelling, building or structure shall not be ordered demolished or closed, but its owner may be ordered to repair the same by cleaning or removal of the graffiti. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)	Notwithstanding the requirements of any other Code section in this chapter, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished within 270 days of the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section or any equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action shall commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)	If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)	The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)	The lien provided for in subsection (e) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in DeKalb County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall, within 90 days of the completion of repairs, demolition or closure, forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
(h)	It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-5; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A § 48-4-78 that requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply; provided, further, that redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. The tax commissioner may initiate enforcement of liens imposed under this section at any time following receipt of the final determination of costs from the public officer. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(i)	The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. The tax commissioner may retain an amount equal to the cost of administering collection of the lien. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(j)	In addition to the remedies and powers authorized elsewhere in this chapter, the governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(k)	Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by writ of certiorari to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-206. Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest.
(a)	Summons and copies of the complaint shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)	In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure, or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)	At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint and summons by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are readily ascertainable. Copies of the complaint and summons shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any; 
(3)	For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing; and 
(4)	A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in which the dwelling, building, structure, or property is located at the time of filing the complaint in municipal court. 
(b)	The public officer shall cause an affidavit of service to be filed of record in the municipal court prior to the hearing showing compliance with the service requirements of this section. Such affidavit shall constitute a prima facie showing of minimum procedural due process and shall constitute sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(c)	Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on every interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-207. Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created.
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-208. General cleanliness of premises.
The owner and occupant of property within the city shall each be independently responsible for keeping the premises, including all buildings thereon and the full yard thereof, clean and free from all garbage, refuse, filth, dirt, ashes, trash, rubbish and other offensive materials. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-209. Disorderly house.
(a)	Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, illicit drug activity, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct proscribed thereby. 
(b)	Any person who shall allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous persons to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant to depart. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-210. Violations; enforcement penalties.
Any person who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-11; each day of continued violation, after citation, shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines, upon conviction, the director shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary, by-pass, or inter-connection has been discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 1, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Secs. 16-211—16-300. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. BLIGHTED PROPERTY
Sec. 16-301. Purpose.
The existence of real property that is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, this board of commissioners, in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations at Chapter 61, Urban Redevelopment, of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 2, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-302. Definitions.
Blighted property, blighted, or blight means any urbanized or developed property that: 
(1)	Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
a.	Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structure; 
b.	Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; 
c.	An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
d.	A site identified by the federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601, et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
e.	Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.	The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
(2)	Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of aesthetic conditions. 
Building inspector means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or thorough local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
Governing authority means the City Council of the City of Brookhaven, a Georgia municipal corporation. 
Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, that is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
Person means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
Public officer means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 2, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-303. Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property.
(a)	There is hereby levied on all real property within the city that has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven (7.0) to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house that is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
(b)	Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(c)	Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 2, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-304. Identification of blighted property.
(a)	In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)	An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed, 
a.	A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in ordinance, or 
b.	The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels that may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(2)	A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)	Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)	The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of DeKalb County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)	The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location where the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(c)	Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the municipal court clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days' notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the designated legal organ in DeKalb County, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(d)	At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the judge of municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the Tax Commissioner of DeKalb County, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(e)	Persons aggrieved by the determination of the court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of DeKalb County for a writ of certiorari within 30 days of issuance of the court's written determination. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 2, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-305. Remediation or redevelopment.
(a)	A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property that has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)	Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director that addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
(2)	Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to article II or article IX of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Brookhaven. 
(b)	Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the Tax Commissioner of DeKalb County. 
(c)	All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and development department, and contain the following: 
(1)	The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)	The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)	On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)	The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources that will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
(5)	The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
(6)	Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 2, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-306. Decrease of tax rate.
(a)	Real property that has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in section 16-304, Identification of Blighted Property, of this article, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $25,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four successive years. 
(b)	In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 2, 12-12-2017)
Sec. 16-307. Notice to tax commissioner.
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the Tax Commissioner of DeKalb County in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the DeKalb County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-12-05, § 2, 12-12-2017)
Chapter 18 OFFENSES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. Fines and punishment.
Unless otherwise specified, any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in a manner consistent with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-28, 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Sec. 18-2. Disorderly conduct.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct. 
(b)	The following acts, among others, are declared to be disorderly conduct: 
(1)	Acting in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health; 
(2)	Acting in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)	Causing, provoking or engaging in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)	Assembling or congregating with another or others for the purpose of gaming; 
(5)	Being in or about any place, alone or with others, with the purpose or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing, or to aid or abet any person doing so; 
(6)	Being in or about any place where gaming or illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcohol; 
(7)	Directing fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(8)	Interfering, by acts of physical obstruction, with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(9)	Congregating with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and failing to clear that public way after being ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority; 
(10)	Standing or remaining in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass, or public way so as to impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and failing to clear such street, sidewalk, overpass or public way after being requested or ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; 
(11)	Disrupting by actions which tend to cause an immediate breach of the peace of the undisturbed activities of any business establishment, tenants of multifamily housing, a house of worship, a hospital, or a home for the elderly or a private residence; or 
(12)	Throwing bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles, or any other debris on public property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-1, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-3. Obstruction and interference.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally interfere or hinder a city official, employee, or agent when such official, employee or agent has properly identified either himself or is otherwise identifiable as such and is engaged in the lawful performance of his official duties. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false name, address or date of birth, or any other false information, to any city official, employee, or agent in the lawful discharge of his official duties with the intent to mislead such official, employee or agent in any way. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to provide identification, address or date of birth to a city police officer or fire marshal while said officer is conducting an investigation and the officer has reasonable belief that said individual committed a crime, is committing a crime or is about to commit a crime. However, said person shall not be compelled to answer any other inquiry. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-2, 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2023-10-05, § 1, 10-24-2023)
Sec. 18-4. Shoplifting.
(a)	Unlawful act. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of theft by shoplifting within the corporate limits of the city when the property which is the subject of the theft is $500.00 or less in value. 
(b)	Defined. A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to such person's own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)	Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)	Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)	Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)	Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5)	Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(c)	Defendant rights. Any defendant charged under this section shall be entitled upon request to have the case against such person transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-3, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-5. Prostitution and related offenses.
(a)	House of ill fame.
(1)	A person having or exercising control over the use of any place or conveyance within the city which would offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of illicit sex commits the offense of keeping a place of prostitution when such person knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of illicit sex. 
(2)	Those places or conveyances which have been adjudged to be places of prostitution, as provided by law or ordinance, may be abated as also provided in this chapter. 
(b)	Solicitation for an illicit sexual act.
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person, to offer, or consent or engage in the performance of any illicit sexual act for money or any other thing of value or encourage, aid or abet another to do so. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person, to entice, solicit, pander, purchase or procure another to commit any illicit sexual act for money or other things of value. An illicit sexual act is defined as one or more of the following: 
a.	Sexual intercourse for hire; 
b.	Fellatio or cunnilingus for hire; 
c.	Other sodomy for hire; 
d.	Masturbation for hire. 
(2)	For purposes of subsection (b)(1) of this section, the term "any person" shall refer to individuals over the age of 18 years of age and also includes solicitors of illicit sexual acts or panderers who solicit, procure or purchase another to perform any illicit sexual act in exchange for money or other things of value, and who are commonly referred to as "johns" or "tricks." 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-4, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-6. Public indecency.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)	Simulated acts of sexual intercourse; 
(2)	An exposure of one's genitals, or of one's breasts, if female, except in a place designed for same; 
(3)	Urination or defecation. 
(b)	Nothing in this chapter shall hinder the right of a woman from nursing a child in a public place with discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-5, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-7. Vandalism.
(a)	Public property.
(1)	It is unlawful for any person to vandalize, deface, or in any way alter the appearance or operation of any public property or park in the city. 
(2)	No person shall spit, urinate or defecate on the floors, walls, or other parts of any public building in the city. 
(b)	Private property.
(1)	It is unlawful for any person to vandalize, deface, or in any way alter the appearance or operation of any private property without the consent of the owner. 
(2)	This subsection (b) shall not be construed as affecting any remedy the private property owner may have at law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-6, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-8. Graffiti.
(a)	Purpose and intent.
(1)	Graffiti promotes blight in the neighborhoods in which it occurs and encourages similar acts of vandalism. Without prompt removal of graffiti, other properties become the target of graffiti and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to live and work. 
(2)	The city, in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare, further find and declare that to be truly effective in the deterrence, eradication, and removal of graffiti, it is necessary to implement a comprehensive anti-graffiti ordinance. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Graffiti means the defacing, altering, modifying, changing, drawing, damaging, or destroying by spraying or use of paint, or marking of ink, dye, or any other similar substances on public and/or private buildings, structures, and places, an inscription, slogan, drawing, or modification without the express permission of the owner of the property and, as required by law, a valid permit from the city for the installation of the graffiti. 
(c)	Prohibited acts.
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, alter, modify, change, draw, damage, or destroy by spraying or use of paint, or marking of ink, dye, or any other similar substance on public and/or private buildings, structures and places, an inscription, slogan, drawing, or modification, or otherwise damage private or public property in contradiction of other city ordinances, by or through the application of graffiti. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise being in control of any real property within the city to maintain, permit, or allow any graffiti to be placed upon any structure located on such property without a valid permit from the city when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property after notice, in writing, has been given to such person in control of said property. 
(d)	Notice of removal. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or utility owner, or any manager, tenant, or agent for the owner of the property without a valid permit for the installation of the graffiti, to permit the application of or fail to remove graffiti within ten business days after written notice is given. 
(e)	Notice procedure.
(1)	Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on any property, including structures or improvements within the city, a police officer or code enforcement officer shall give or cause to be given written notice to the property owner and/or owner's agent, tenant, or manager to remove such graffiti or other unsightly condition therefrom. 
(2)	The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the following manners: 
a.	By personal service or registered or certified mail addressed to the owner or the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address. Such notice shall allow ten days from the date of notice for removal of identified graffiti. 
b.	In the event that the city has attempted to notify the proper person under subsection (e)(2)a of this section and is unable to do so, the city is authorized to post the notice on the main entrance of the building. 
(3)	For the purposes of giving the notice to the owner of the property, the person shown as the owner of said property on the ad valorem tax records of the city shall be sent such notice at the address shown thereon unless the city receives actual notice that another person owns said property. Provided, however, as to any violation of this section in existence on or before the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, any notice of removal shall give 60 days for the removal thereof. 
(f)	Accepted graffiti removal products.
(1)	The department of community development shall maintain a list of substances designated as acceptable products to remove specific types of graffiti from specific surfaces (unpainted brick, concrete, stone, etc.). This list shall include detailed information on the appropriate use of such designated substances. Appropriate use of said substances by property owners shall constitute compliance with the requirement to remove graffiti contained therein. 
(2)	Uses of any of these items or any other items are at the risk of the user. The city does not recommend the products and is the city is not responsible for discoloration of or damage to the finish of the surface the products are used on. 
(g)	City cost declared lien. If the owner of the property fails to remove the graffiti by the end of the ten-day notification period, the city manager may cause the graffiti to be removed and charge to the property owner the expenses incurred. Upon the completion of removal by the city, the city shall provide the proper party written notice consistent with subsections (d) and (e) of this section of the total cost of removal and shall give the property owner 30 days to pay the total cost incurred by the city. If the expenses of the removal remain unpaid for a period of 60 days, the city may place a lien against the property upon which said nuisance existed and from which the graffiti was removed. 
(h)	Fines and punishment. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this section shall be punished in a manner consistent with section 1-11. However, upon finding of guilt under this subsection, the municipal court may suspend or reduce a portion or all of its sentence upon such conditions to include but not be limited to the restoring of the property so defaced, damaged, or destroyed, or other remedial action. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-7, 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Sec. 18-9. Tampering with utilities.
It is unlawful for any person to damage, disturb or tamper with an electric power pole, telephone pole or other utility pole or their respective guide or support wires or other utility structure or facility located above or below the ground within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-8, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-10. Loitering and prowling.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for a person to be in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for a person aged 17 years or younger to be in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, is present at such a place during school hours, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any parent guardian or other persona having the custody or control of any minor to permit, allow or encourage such minor to violate subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for the proprietor, manager or other person having charge or control of any public or other place to permit, allow or encourage any minor to violate subsection (a) of this section in such place. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-9, 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2016-04-01, §§ 1, 2, 4-26-2016)
Sec. 18-11. Public intoxication and public consumption.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear on the streets or roads of the city or in any public place or place of business patronized by the public in a state of intoxication or incapacitation caused by illicit drugs, alcohol, concentrated vapors, or inhalants. The condition of intoxication or incapacitation shall be manifested by boisterousness, public indecency, indecent acts, vulgar, profane, or loud language, unconsciousness, disorientation or the inability to care for his own needs or recognize obvious dangers. 
(b)	No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or transport open containers of alcoholic beverages on or upon public areas, except where authorized by the issuance of a permit for the consumption of alcoholic beverages in county/city parks. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-11, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-12. Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings and gatherings.
It shall be unlawful for a person with the intent to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting or gathering of the city council or any board, committee or instrumentality thereof or of the state to substantially obstruct or interfere with the meeting or gathering by physical action or verbal utterance. The term "lawful meeting or gathering" shall mean any such time and place where a quorum is present. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-12, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-13. Creating a disturbance at schools.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance in any private, public or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds or on the fields or grounds lawfully used for school activities while such recreational areas are in use or other activities within the school or school activities on the school grounds or fields while such activities are in progress thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-13, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-14. Discharge of weapon.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire a gun, rifle, pistol, revolver, cannon, air rifle, firearm of any type or shoot a slingshot or bow and arrow within the city, except in defense of a person or property. This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer while in the discharge of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-14, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-15. False representation of age.
It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent his age in any manner whatever for the purpose of gaining entrance to events or establishments that require a minimum age including, but not limited to, bars, nightclubs, movies, video stores, bookstores or bingo parlors. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-15, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-16. Fines and punishment.
Unless otherwise specified, any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in a manner consistent with section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-16, 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Secs. 18-17—18-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS
Sec. 18-36. Urban camping and improper use of public places.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Camp means residing in or using a location for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for more than one hour at a time; cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
Storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for more than one hour. 
(b)	City parks and city greenspaces. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park or greenspace owned or maintained by the city. 
(c)	Streets and sidewalks. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any street or sidewalk or any public or railroad right-of-way. 
(d)	Other property; blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any public property or private property so as to interfere with the ingress or egress from buildings. 
(e)	Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this section by simply sleeping, sitting or lying down in a prohibited location or for a prohibited period of time without having first received an oral or written warning to cease such unlawful conduct. 
(f)	Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, this section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)	Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)	Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using sidewalks; 
(3)	Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)	Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
(5)	Persons sitting down while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks or other special events taking place in any park or on any street or sidewalk closed by permit for such purpose; 
(6)	Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)	Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)	Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(9)	Persons sitting or lying down in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provisions of meals; or 
(10)	Children under the age of six years sleeping anywhere while being accompanied by a supervising adult or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-21, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-37. Unauthorized persons entering school buildings.
No person shall enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on days that school is in session, or until 10:00 p.m. at those schools which have extended sessions, who is not a regularly enrolled student, teacher or employee at that school, unless the person shall have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and been identified to the principal or the principal's agent and received written permission to remain on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-22, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-38. Unauthorized persons not to remain in school buildings when requested to leave.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any public, private or parochial school or on surrounding school grounds after being directed to leave by the principal of the school or designated agent. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-23, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-39. Residential picketing.
(a)	The term "picket" or "picketing" shall refer to the following types of activity: 
(1)	Patrolling or stationing oneself at a residence, bearing some insignia or sign designed to persuade or protest; 
(2)	Staging a public or private protest of any kind; 
(3)	Obstructing passage to or from a residence; or 
(4)	Promoting a strike or a boycott at an individual residence. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to picket or engage in picketing upon, before or about the private residence or home of any individual. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-24, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-40. Public transit; smoking and drinking prohibited; evasion of payment of fare prohibited.
(a)	Smoking and drinking prohibited on MARTA buses, trains, rail cars and paid areas. It shall be unlawful for occupants of Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) buses, trains or rail cars to smoke tobacco or consume alcoholic beverages while such buses, trains or rail cars are transporting passengers within the corporate limits of the city or within paid areas adjacent thereto. Charter bus service is excluded from these restrictions. 
(b)	Evading payment of fare. It shall be unlawful within the corporate limits of the city for any person to evade or attempt to evade payment of the fare for transportation service upon the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) rapid rail system or public transit bus. As used in this section, the term "evasion of payment of fare" shall include the following acts, activities or conduct: 
(1)	Entry into a paid area or upon a rapid rail car of public transit bus without payment of the fare charged for transportation service; 
(2)	Misuse of a transfer, Breeze Card, pass, ticket, token or other evidence of payment or prepayment of a fare issued by the MARTA with the intent to avoid or to assist another in avoiding payment of the fare charged for transportation service; 
(3)	Use or attempted use of a signed MARTA Breeze Card for the payment of the fare charged for transportation service by a person who is not the person whose signature appears on the Breeze Card. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-25, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-41. Parking on public transit property.
(a)	In all parking lots, parking decks and other such facilities owned or operated by any public transit authority or established for the exclusive purpose of providing parking for passengers of rapid rail or public transit buses, it shall be unlawful to: 
(1)	Stop, stand or park a vehicle other than in marked spaces designed for that purpose; 
(2)	Stop, stand or park a vehicle on any yellow curb; 
(3)	Stop, stand or park a vehicle in any location which results in impeding ingress and egress to and from said facility or which results in impeding the free passage of any other vehicle; 
(4)	Leave any vehicle unattended in areas designated as "kiss-ride" or designated as "attended vehicles only"; 
(5)	Stop, stand or park any taxicab or other vehicle for hire, whether attended or unattended, in any area not specifically designated for such vehicles; 
(6)	Stop, stand or park any vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, except in areas specifically designated for that use, such as "kiss-ride" or "passenger drop-off" areas; 
(7)	Stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period in excess of 24 hours unless such parking area is designated "overnight" or "long-term" parking; 
(8)	Stop, stand or park any vehicle for any purpose other than to board the rapid rail car or public transit bus serving such parking lot; or 
(9)	Create or maintain any fire or flame, including fires or flames for cooking or grilling, or to fail to extinguish said fire or flame and to remove from such public transit parking facility all debris and residue associated with the creation and maintenance of said fire or flame. 
(b)	Any person violating subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $250.00. Such offense may be cited by the issuance of a written citation which shall be left on the violator's vehicle and which shall contain, at a minimum: 
(1)	The nature of the violation; 
(2)	The amount of the fine which will be levied for such violation; 
(3)	That the cited individual has the right to contest the citation and be given an opportunity to be heard; 
(4)	The location of the court in which the cited individual must appear to contest same; and 
(5)	The location at which fines may be paid. 
(c)	The operator of said vehicle shall also be subject to citation by personal delivery of said citation. 
(d)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the enforcement of any other provision of state or municipal law which may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-26, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-42. Restrictions on outdoor water use.
(a)	Purpose and intent. The mayor and council of the city have determined that as situations arise which require conservation of outdoor water use, as mandated by rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division as well as state law, the city shall preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city through enforcement of this section. 
(b)	State mandated requirement.
(1)	Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(2)	Subsection (b)(1) of this section shall not create any limitation, unless otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, upon the following outdoor water uses: 
a.	Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
b.	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city regulations and state guidelines; 
c.	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable county board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
d.	Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
e.	Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
f.	Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
g.	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
h.	Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
i.	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
j.	Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
k.	Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
l.	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
m.	Hydroseeding. 
(c)	Adoption of additional restrictions. The city hereby adopts by reference the outdoor water use rules mandated by the state department of natural resources environmental protection division (EPD) from time to time, as the same are modified by the county water system (the EPD/DeKalb County Restrictions). A copy of the current EPD/DeKalb County Restrictions is incorporated herein, and a current copy of the same as modified shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. Any violation of the EPD/DeKalb County Restrictions in effect from time to time shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(d)	Enforcement. Every city police officer and code enforcement officer shall be authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this section through the issuance of noncriminal or criminal citations. Such officers shall have the authority to enter property for the purpose of inspection for compliance. A record of each citation shall be maintained. If personal contact is made with the violator, the officer shall require immediate compliance. 
(e)	Civil penalties and fines. With the exception of any violation of subsection (b) of this section, any person or entity accused of violating any provision of this section shall, with respect to the first violation, be provided with a written warning. Any person accused of violating any provision of this section for a second time shall be issued a noncriminal citation requiring the payment of a civil penalty to the city in the amount of $250.00. For a third violation of this section, a violator shall be issued a noncriminal citation requiring a payment of a civil penalty of $500.00 to the city. All penalties are due and payable on or before ten days following the date of the citation. 
(f)	Appeals. Any alleged violator may appeal a civil citation to the city manager within the ten-day period for the payment of the penalty. All such appeals shall be in writing and shall state the basis for the appeal. If a timely appeal is filed, the penalty shall be stayed until a determination is made by the city manager. If the city manager determines that a violation has not occurred or that a reasonable hardship exists justifying the waiver or reduction of the penalty, the city manager may reduce or waive the penalty. If any penalty is not paid or appealed within ten days of the date of the citation, or paid within three days after the denial of an appeal by the city manager, the violator shall be issued a criminal citation requiring an appearance in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-27, 3-25-2014)
Secs. 18-43—18-72. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER
Sec. 18-73. Begging and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person or upon the property in his immediate possession. 
Ask, beg or solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage or the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)	Exceptions. Except when performed in the manner set forth in subsection (d)(1) or (2) of this section or in any of the locations set forth in subsections (c)(1) through (8) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg or solicit money or other things of value. 
(c)	Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)	On private property, if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)	Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)	Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)	Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)	In any public transportation vehicle or in any bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxi stand; 
(6)	From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle or the obtaining of alms by representatives of any tax exempt organization without either accosting or forcing oneself on the company of another pursuant to a permit issued by the police department for the conduct of any such activity which permit shall not exceed 12 hours in any one day or be issued to any organization more than once per month; 
(7)	From any persons who are waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; 
(8)	Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility. 
(d)	Manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)	By accosting another; or 
(2)	By forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(e)	Who may press charges. Persons who may press charges under this section include not only the victim of the prohibited solicitation, but also any person who witnesses such conduct, including, but not limited to, police officers, security officers, hotel personnel and bystanders. Evidence to support conviction for violation of this section may include, but is not limited to, the testimony of such witnesses, videotape evidence of the violation and/or other admissible evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-31, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-74. Treasure hunts.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Treasure hunts means advertising campaigns conducted for the purpose of promoting the sale of any merchandise, commodity or service of any business or profession conducted for private or corporate gain, whereby some article, thing or token is hidden within the corporate limits of the city and clues as to the location of such article, thing or token is given by any form of advertising, whether by newspaper, radio or television or in any other manner, but shall not include private social parties involving no element of commerce or gain. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or aid and abet in the conducting of any treasure hunt within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-32, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-75. Moving household goods at night.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner of the household goods and furnishings to be moved to move or transport household goods and furnishings from one place of residence to another between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-33, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-76. False representations to city departments.
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly and willfully and with intent thereby to mislead, either in such person's own behalf or in behalf of others, as principal or as agent, to make or file orally or in writing any false representations of fact to any police officer of the city or to any department of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-34, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-77. Sale or possession of goods containing or using the unauthorized name or seal of other persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the name or seal of any other person incidental to the sale, display or use of goods which has not been authorized by the lawful owner thereof for the purpose of deceiving the public who knows, or should have known, that such use is unauthorized. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-35, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-78. Reckless operation of motor vehicle on private property.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle-access or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility by sudden starting, stopping or turning so as to endanger the person or property of another. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-36, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-79. Non-driver participation in street racing and reckless driving exhibitions.
(a)	Definitions. For purposes of this section the following terms shall mean: 
Illegal street racing and reckless driver exhibition means a motor vehicle contest using public highways, streets, or rights-of-way in violation of applicable state motor vehicle and traffic laws, including without limitation O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-186, 40-6-251, and 40-6-390. Illegal street racing and reckless driving exhibitions may include, but are not limited to, situations in which (1) a group of motor vehicles or individuals has arrived at a location for the purpose of participating in the event; (2) a group of individuals has gathered on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent of the property for the purpose of participating in the event; (3) one or more individuals has impeded the free public use of a public street, sidewalk, or highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the purpose of conducting the event; (4) two or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; (5) one or more drivers is revving their engine or spinning their tires in preparation for the event; (6) an individual is stationed at or near one or more motor vehicles serving as a race starter. 
Organizer means any individual who in any manner knowingly takes part in the planning, organization, coordination, facilitation, advertising, or sharing the location for illegal street racing or reckless driver exhibition, or who collects money in connection with an illegal street racing or reckless driver exhibition; 
Participant means any individual who is knowingly present at an illegal street racing exhibition for the purpose of actively taking part in the event, through conduct including riding in a race vehicle as a passenger, assisting the organizers and/or drivers in carrying out or promoting the event, or exchanging money or anything of value with any driver, car owner, or other participant in connection with the event. For the purposes of this section, a person who is only a bystander, passer-by, or observer not engaged in the illegal activity shall not be deemed a participant. 
Race starter means a person, standing in front of motor vehicles with their engines on, while possessing or holding any device to be used to signal the drivers to begin the race or reckless driving exhibition, such as a flag, cloth, flashlight, or other signaling device. 
(b)	Violations. No person shall knowingly act as an organizer, participant, or race starter in or of an illegal street racing or reckless driving exhibition. 
(c)	Penalties.
(1)	Violations of section 18-79 shall be punished by a fine of at least $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and/or incarceration for not more than six months, plus all applicable court costs and fees, subject to all limitations in the charter of the city or applicable state law. 
(2)	Any motor vehicle used in illegal street racing or reckless driving exhibition may be removed and impounded by police as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206, or pursuant to a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. An impounded vehicle may be held for not less than 30 days or final adjudication of the case, to the maximum extent allowed under state law. 
(d)	Exemptions. This section shall not apply to licensed or duly authorized racetracks, drag strips, or other designated areas set aside by proper authorities for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2020-11-02, § 1, 11-10-2020)
Sec. 18-80. Unlawful use of weapons; hunting.
It shall be unlawful to use any weapon, as defined in section 19-28, for purposes of hunting any animal while the user of the weapon or the target of the weapon is on or in any park or land owned or operated by the city for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2021-08-02, § 2, 8-24-2021)
Sec. 18-81. Criminal mischief; projected images.
(a)	No person shall intentionally project, using any medium, any image onto a building, structure, or other property without the consent of the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or other property. For purposes of this subsection, the term "image" means a visual representation or likeness of a person or object, including text, graphics, logos, other artwork, or combination thereof. 
(b)	A person who violates this section commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, and shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250.00 per day. Moreover, any equipment used in furtherance of this crime may be seized by the city's police department and forfeited to the city. 
(c)	In addition to the civil and criminal penalties set forth above, the city, or any owner or occupant of a property that is the subject of any violation, shall have the right to seek injunctive relief to enjoin any further or continuing violations of this section. 
(d)	A violation of this section is deemed a criminal act for purposes of any state law that authorizes the recovery of personal or property damages or equitable relief by a person injured by a criminal act. 
(e)	A person who violates this section by displaying or projecting an image that contains a credible threat with malicious intent to harass, threaten, or intimidate another person or group, as defined below, commits a felony of the third degree. 
(f)	"Credible threat" means any threat that places the person or group who is the target of the threat in reasonable fear for their physical safety or the physical safety of their family members or individuals closely associated with the person, and which is made with the apparent ability to carry out the threat to cause such harm. It is not necessary to prove that the person making the threat had the intent to actually carry out the threat, only that the person had the subjective intent to cause reasonable fear in another person or group or consciously disregarded a substantial risk that the communication would be viewed as threatening violence. 
(g)	Any person who violates this section and intentionally selects the property with malicious intent to harass, threaten, or intimidate any person or group associated with the property based upon the person's or group's actual or perceived race, color, religion, ethnicity, ancestry, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or disability commits a felony of the third degree. 
(Ord. No. 2023-11-01, § 1, 11-14-2023)
Sec. 18-82. Overnight time restrictions on door-to-door solicitation and canvassing.
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to set forth minimum regulations for solicitors and canvassers who enter upon private property for the purpose of selling goods, wares, merchandise or services, or to solicit donations or to canvass for political or other not-for-profit purposes; to protect privacy and safety overnight; and to balance the rights and interests of those engaged in door-to-door soliciting and canvassing activities with the rights and interests of those who do not wish to be disturbed by such activities on their private property. 
(b)	Definitions. The following definitions shall be used in the interpretation, construction, application and enforcement of this chapter: 
Person means any person over the age of 18, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization. 
Solicitor means any person over the age of 18 who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been requested, invited, or given permission by the occupant thereof: 
(1)	For the purpose of taking or soliciting donations; 
(2)	For the purpose of taking orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature for future delivery; or 
(3)	For the purpose of selling services to be performed at that time or in the future. 
Canvasser means any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been requested, invited, or given permission by the occupant thereof, for the purpose of either acquiring information from or disseminating information to the occupant(s) of the premises, whether directly to the occupant(s) or by leaving written or printed material anywhere upon the premises, including but not limited to doing so for charitable, political, or other not-for-profit purposes. 
(c)	Hours of solicitation and canvassing. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct soliciting or canvassing activity on any residential premises between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(d)	Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state, or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(e)	Soliciting and canvassing - violations. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction in the first instance. Any second or subsequent violation of the provisions of this chapter on a separate date within one year of the first violation shall constitute a misdemeanor. In addition to any other available remedies and penalties, any misdemeanor violation(s) may be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each individual private residence or the premises upon which a violation or occurs or continues. 
(f)	Injunctive relief. In addition to the penalties set forth above, the city, or any owner or occupant of a property that is the subject of any violation, shall have the right to seek injunctive relief to enjoin any further or continuing violations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2023-11-01, § 2, 11-14-2023)
Secs. 18-83—18-99. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Sec. 18-100. Loitering for purposes of engaging in drug related activity.
(a)	Legislative findings and intent. 
(1)	The city finds that the increase throughout the city of loitering in public places for the purposes of unlawful drug-related activity, or in effect, "open air" drug dealing, has become extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses. This activity has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places, but also to an enhanced sense of fear and intimidation and disorder. 
(2)	Loitering for purposes of unlawful drug-related activity usually includes a dominate presence of those persons engaging in such activity by approaching pedestrians, encouraging the presence of vehicle and pedestrian traffic for the purpose of unlawful drug-related activity in and out of residential areas, to or from motor vehicles or in parking lots. Such presence carries with it an implicit threat to visitors and residents to avoid the use of these public places. The avoidance of such places by law-abiding citizens leads to an increased opportunity for the unlawful criminal activity and furthers the decay of the neighborhood. 
(3)	The city has a strong interest in ensuring that citizens feel safe in their neighborhoods, in safeguarding the economic vitality of its business districts, and in preserving public places for their intended purposes. 
(4)	This section is not intended to limit any person from exercising their right to assemble or engage in any other constitutionally protected activity. This section applies to all persons with the requisite intent to induce another to engage in unlawful drug-related activity. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as defined in section 18-10, in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or any public or private place in order to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to engage in unlawful drug-related activity. 
(1)	The term "unlawful drug-related activity" means conduct which constitutes an offense defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, as amended; conduct which constitutes complicity to commit such an offense by, for example, acting as a lookout; or conduct which constitutes conspiracy to commit such an offense. 
(2)	The term "public place" means an area open to the public or exposed to public view and includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles, whether moving or not, and buildings open to the general public, including those which serve food or drink, or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
(c)	A police officer who observes a person loitering under circumstances that provide the officer with a reasonable basis to believe unlawful drug-related activity is occurring or has occurred may detain the individual for the purpose of investigating whether the person is in violation of this section. 
(d)	A police officer may not detain an individual under this section unless both of the following elements are satisfied: 
(1)	In the presence or observation of the police officer, the person engages in one or more of the following behaviors: 
a.	The passing or receiving from a passerby, bystander or person in a motor vehicle money, objects having characteristics consistent with controlled substances, and/or an envelope, bag or other container that could reasonably contain such objects or money; 
b.	The concealing or attempting to conceal an object having characteristics consistent with controlled substances and/or an envelope, bag, clear plastic bag or other container that could reasonably contain such objects; 
c.	The fleeing or obscuring himself; 
d.	The communication to another person the fact that law enforcement officers are in the vicinity in a manner that suggests that the communication is a warning; or 
e.	The possession of any instrument or object that is designed or marketed as useful primarily for one or more of the following purposes: 
1.	To inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce marijuana or a controlled substance into the human body; 
2.	To enhance the effect of marijuana or a controlled substance on the human body; 
3.	To test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of marijuana or a controlled substance; 
4.	To process or prepare marijuana or a controlled substance for introduction into the human body; 
5.	To conceal any quantity of marijuana or a controlled substance; or 
6.	To contain or hold marijuana or a controlled substance while it is being introduced into the human body. 
(2)	One of the following factors applies: 
a.	The officer is aware that, within the preceding three years, the person has been convicted of an offense defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, or of complicity to commit such an offense, or of conspiracy to commit such an offense with in the preceding three years; 
b.	The officer has knowledge of a specific reliable tip concerning unlawful drug-related activity at a specific location, and the person who is found loitering is doing so at a time, in a place or in a manner that is otherwise consistent with the details provided in the tip; 
c.	The person is loitering in an area that has been designated a notorious drug-related activity area as defined in subsection (g) of this section; 
d.	The person is in an area where he is prohibited by court order from being, and the officer is aware of the court order; 
e.	The officer knows that the person has been previously convicted of loitering with the intention of engaging in unlawful drug-related activity under this section; or 
f.	Any vehicle the person has approached or communicated through is registered to an individual who has been convicted of an unlawful drug-related activity in the previous three years, and the officer is aware of that fact. 
(e)	No arrest may be made for a violation of this section unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain the person's presence and conduct, unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable to afford such an opportunity, and no one shall be convicted of violating this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given at the scene was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(f)	If a police officer who detains a person pursuant to this section develops probable cause to believe that the person is in violation of this section, the officer may order the person to immediately leave the location and to remain at least 500 feet away from the location for at least five hours. In the event that person refuses to comply with such an order, the police officer may arrest the person and charge him with a violation of this section. 
(g)	The city council may, by written directive and after consultation with the chief of police, clearly and publicly designate areas of the city that are frequently associated with excessive incidents of drug-related offenses, including offenses involving controlled substances, as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, or marijuana. The chief of police shall file such designations with the city clerk, with the clerk of the municipal court and with the clerk of the superior court. Prior to recommending such a determination under this subsection, the chief of police shall consult, as he deems appropriate, with persons who are knowledgeable about the effects of drug-related activity in areas in which this section may be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be limited to, members of the department of police with special training or experience related to drug-related activity; other personnel of that department with particular knowledge of drug-related activities in the proposed designated area; appointed and elected officials of the area; and community-based organizations. The chief of police shall develop and implement procedures for the bi-annual review and update of any designations made under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-51, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-101. Marijuana possession.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. Any defendant charged with possession of one ounce or less of marijuana shall be entitled on request to have the case against such defendant transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county wherein the alleged offense occurred. 
(b)	The term "marijuana" means all parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin; but shall not include samples as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-25(3)(p) and shall not include the completely defoliated mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil, or cake, or the completely sterilized samples of seeds of the plant which are incapable of germination. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-52, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-102. Transactions in drug related paraphernalia within the city.
(a)	It shall be unlawful with the city for any person or corporation to sell, rent, lease, give, exchange, otherwise distribute, or possess with intent to distribute any object or materials of any kind which such person or corporation intends to be used for the purpose of planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body marijuana or a controlled substance. 
(b)	Unless stated within the body of the advertisement or notice that the object or materials that are advertised or about which information is disseminated are not available for distribution of any sort in the state, it shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to sell, rent, lease, give, exchange, distribute, or possess with intent to distribute any advertisement of any kind or notice of any kind which gives information, directly or indirectly, on where, how, from whom, or by what means any object or materials may be obtained or made, which object or materials such person or corporation intends to be used for the purpose of planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body marijuana or a controlled substance. 
(c)	In determining whether any object or materials are intended for any of the purposes listed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a court or other authority shall consider all logically relevant factors. In a trial under this section, any evidence admissible on this question under the rules of evidence shall be admitted. Subject to the rules of evidence, when they are the object of an offer of proof in a court proceeding, the following factors are among those that should be considered by a court or other authority on this question: 
(1)	Statements by an owner or anyone in control of the object or materials; 
(2)	Instructions provided with the object or materials; 
(3)	Descriptive materials accompanying the object or materials; 
(4)	National and local advertising or promotional materials concerning the object or materials; 
(5)	The appearance of, and any writing or other representations appearing on, the object or materials; 
(6)	The manner in which the object or materials are displayed for sale or other distribution; 
(7)	Expert testimony concerning the object or materials; and 
(8)	Any written or pictorial materials which are present in the place where the object is located. 
(d)	For a first offense, any person or corporation which violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For a second offense, the defendant shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-53, 3-25-2014)
Sec. 18-103. Displays.
It is unlawful for any person to place in an area accessible to minors any objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia or the smoking or ingesting of tobacco; and any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of such publication, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia or the smoking or ingesting of tobacco. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-01, § 16-54, 3-25-2014)
Secs. 18-104—18-134. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. RESERVED
Secs. 18-135—18-139. Reserved.
Chapter 21 SIGNS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 21-1. Purpose and findings.
The city council further finds that signs provide an important medium through which persons may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, the number, size, design characteristics, and locations of signs in the city can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and to the city's general public welfare, as well as create an aesthetic nuisance. The city, further, finds that signs have become excessive and that many signs are distracting and dangerous to motorists and pedestrians, are confusing to the public and substantially detract from the beauty and appearance of the city. The city finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of the city in enacting the ordinance from which this chapter is derived are as follows: 
(1)	To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to implement the policies and objectives of a comprehensive development plan of the city through the enactment of a comprehensive set of regulations governing signs in the city; 
(2)	To regulate the erection and placement of signs within the city in order to provide safe operating conditions for pedestrian and vehicular traffic without unnecessary and unsafe distractions to drivers or pedestrians; 
(3)	To preserve the value of property on which signs are located and from which signs may be viewed; 
(4)	To maintain an aesthetically attractive city in which signs are compatible with the use patterns of established zoning districts; 
(5)	To maintain for the city's residents, workers and visitors a safe and aesthetically attractive environment and to advance the aesthetic interest of the city; 
(6)	To establish comprehensive sign regulations that effectively balance legitimate business and development needs with a safe and aesthetically attractive environment for residents, workers, and visitors to the city; 
(7)	To provide fair and reasonable opportunities for advertisement by the business community located within the city so as to promote the economic vitality of local businesses; 
(8)	To ensure the protection of free speech rights under the state constitution and the United States Constitution with the city; 
(9)	To establish a permit system to allow specific types of signs in zoning districts consistent with the uses, intent and aesthetic characteristics of those districts; 
(10)	To allow certain signs that are small, safe, unobtrusive and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter but without a requirement for permits; 
(11)	To provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances; 
(12)	To place reasonable controls on nonconforming signs that are by definition contrary to the public health, safety and welfare while protecting the constitutional rights of the owners of said nonconforming signs; and 
(13)	To provide for the maintenance of signs, and to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-1), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-1), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned sign means any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, and for which no person accepts maintenance responsibility. Also, any sign advertising an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted and/or any sign associated with a business or commercial use that has ceased operations for six months or more. 
Animated sign means a sign that all or any part thereof visibly moves or uses movement or a change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. This includes signs that rotate or revolve or signs that display a message in more than one direction. Provided, however, that official traffic control devices and warning signs conforming to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices are excluded from this definition. Electronic signs are excluded from this definition. 
Banner means a sign other than a flag with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper or fabric that is intended to be hung either with a frame or without a frame. Neither flags nor canopy signs are considered banners. Standard informational signs are excluded from the definition of a banner. 
Beacon means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Business day means any day during which city government offices are open for public business. The term "business day" shall not any include any day during which city government offices are closed after a partial business day due to a holiday, emergency, inclement weather, or the like. 
Candela means a unit of luminous intensity equal to 1/6 0 of the luminous intensity per square centimeter of a blackbody radiating at the temperature of solidification of platinum (2.046K). 
Canopy sign means a sign affixed to, superimposed upon, or painted on any roof or roof-like structure which is extended over a sidewalk, walkway, or vehicle access area. Canopy sign may also mean awning sign. 
Commercial message means sign copy which advertises or directs attention to a business, product, service or transaction, whether existing or proposed. 
Directional sign means a sign specifically placed to manage and avoid conflicting vehicular movements. 
Director means the director of the community development department, or a designee thereof. 
Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas placed back to back against each other and the interior angle formed by the display areas is not greater than 60 degrees, where one sign face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Electronic sign means a message on a lawfully permitted sign, the electronic portion of which may be changed at intervals by electronic process or by remote control. 
Entrance wall sign means any single faced sign attached to or erected and confined within the limits of an exterior wall generally along the perimeter of a development. 
Facade means the exterior wall of a building or tenant space. 
Feather flag means a sign made of paper, cloth, thin plastic or similar lightweight material oriented in a vertical direction and supported by a harpoon-style pole or staff driven into the ground as its primary means of support. 
Flag means any fabric containing colors, patterns, or symbols used as symbol of government or other entity or organization. 
Flagpole means a freestanding structure or a structure attached to a building or to the roof of a building on a parcel of record and used for the sole purpose of displaying flags. 

Historic sign means a sign deemed worthy of preservation because of its value to the city for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)	It is an outstanding example of a sign representative of its era; 
(2)	It is one of the few remaining examples of past sign design or style; 
(3)	It is a sign associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the city; or 
(4)	It is a sign of esthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city. 
Illegal sign means any sign that was erected in violation of the laws, as they existed at the time the sign permit was issued or signs that were not built in conformity with the issued permit or signs requiring a permit that were erected without a permit first having been obtained. 
Illuminated sign means a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
LED sign means an electronically controlled sign utilizing light-emitting diodes or similar technology to form some or the entire sign message. LED signs are a form of electronic signs. 
Luminance means a measure of the brightness of a luminous surface, measured in candelas per unit area. 
Monument sign means a permanently affixed sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are wholly independent from any structure or building for support with a base of a width not less than the width of the sign face. The base shall be constructed of brick, stone, or other architectural masonry material. The sign shall constitute a solid visual block from the base to the top of the sign. 

Multi-faced sign means a sign structure with more than two sign faces situated so that each sign face is facing a different direction. 
Nits means a unit of measurement of luminance, or the intensity of visible light, where one nit is equal to one candela per square meter. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign, legal at the time of erection, but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
Outdoor marketing device is an outdoor facility or equipment used for the purpose of providing a product or service without the immediate presence of an owner or agent, and which is manufactured to include a color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, and/or writing thereon to communicate information regarding the product or service provided thereby to the public. Outdoor marketing devices include: but not limited to: vending machines, newspaper racks, drink machines, and ice boxes. 
Pennant, streamer means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
Planned commercial center means any commercial, office, industrial or mixed-use development that contains any combination of offices, residences, retail or industrial uses with a common entry from a public street and are managed as a whole and in accordance with all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance set forth in chapter 27. 
Portable sign means any sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure, including but not limited to signs on trailers or signs mounted or painted on vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of a sign. Sidewalk signs, standard informational signs and banners are excluded from this definition. 
Projecting sign means any sign which is attached perpendicular to a building or other structure and extends more than 12 inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
Pump-island sign means a sign located on, affixed to, or under a canopy over pump islands of a service station or convenience store with gas pumps. 
Road, accessible means any road or street that provides a means of ingress and egress to the lot. 
Roof sign means a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building that extends above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building or a sign that is wholly or partially above the roof line of a building. 
Rotating sign. See Animated sign.
Sidewalk signs are defined as an A-frame or easel-style sign to be placed on or adjacent to the sidewalk in conjunction with a business establishment. 
Sign means a device, structure or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" shall include the structure upon which a sign face is located. Flags and banners shall be included within this definition only as provided elsewhere herein. Seasonal holiday decorations shall not be included within the definition of "sign" and regulated as such. 
Special event shall be defined for the purpose of this chapter any organized for profit or nonprofit activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation, and/or education which takes place on public property or takes place on private property but requires special public services such as the use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, or sidewalks. Special events may include, but are not limited to, activities such as run/walk events, cycling events, street festivals, parades, triathlon/biathlon, grand openings, concerts, assemblies, block parties, and certain outdoor promotional events. 
Standard informational sign means a non-illuminated sign with a rigid sign face made for short term use, containing no reflecting elements, flags or projections and which is mounted on a post, stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than 3.5 inches. Banners are not included in the definition of a standard informational sign. 
Store front means the exterior wall of a single, undivided unit located within a planned commercial center or business park. 
Street frontage means the lot line that shares a common boundary with any road or street. 
Suspended sign means a sign securely suspended above a pedestrian passageway from beneath a canopy or awning and oriented perpendicular to the adjacent building façade. 
Tri-vision sign means a sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three different sign messages in rotation. 
Wall sign means a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
Wayfinding sign means signage used to assist the public in navigating and locating parking, individual tenants, activity centers, ingress/egress points, and other features internal to a site and that is not visible from public rights-of-way. Examples: 

Window sign means any sign that is placed inside a window, within two feet of a window, or upon the window panes or glass, either inside or outside the building, and is visible from the exterior of the structure. Window signs shall not cover more than 30 percent of the total window area per façade of a business. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-2), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-12), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2017-08-01, § I, 8-8-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-09-08, § I(Attch.), 9-22-2020; Ord. No. 2023-03-01, § I, 3-14-2023)
Secs. 21-3—21-22. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 21-23. Permits.
(a)	Except as specifically excluded from the requirements for obtaining a permit, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a sign permit or any other permit required by this chapter or other ordinances of the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, signs which are not visible from a public right-of-way or from neighboring properties shall not be subject to the standards of this chapter. 
(b)	Sign registration. All nonconforming signs which exceed the maximum height and sign area permitted must be registered with the department within 90 days of notification. The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under section 21-24. No fee will be required. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-3), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-3), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-24. Application information.
(a)	Applications for sign permits required by this chapter shall be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the director. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)	The street address of the property upon which sign is to be located and a plat map of the property which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign; 
(2)	The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located; 
(3)	Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign; 
(4)	Name, address, phone number and occupational tax certificate number of the sign contractor; 
(5)	The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, how the sign is to be illuminated (if at all) and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected; 
(6)	The payment of a $25.00 review fee with the balance of the full application fee due upon issuance; and 
(7)	Applications for ground signs shall include a site plan drawn to scale, including a closed boundary survey of the property gross acreage, the proposed location of subject sign, location of all ground signs on the property, entrance driveways from public streets, street rights-of-way, public or private easements, and building locations. 
The director shall develop such forms as may be necessary to facilitate the permit application process. 
(b)	The applicant shall apply for all other permits or licenses required by city ordinances and state laws and regulations. Obtaining a sign permit does not exempt the permit holder from obtaining and complying with all other permits required for the sign structure. 
(c)	Each application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and save the city harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every character which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. Each applicant shall present to the department, on a request, a certificate of liability insurance prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-4), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-4), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-25. Time for consideration and issuance.
The director shall process all sign permit applications within 45 business days of the director's actual receipt of an application and a sign permit fee. The director shall give notice to the applicant of his decision by hand delivery, by electronic mail, or by mailing a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 45th business day after the director's receipt of the application. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the director fails to act within the 45-day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. A sticker or other device bearing the sign permit number shall be affixed to the sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-5), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-5), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-26. Denial and revocation.
(a)	Procedure. The director shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, incomplete applications, and applications containing any false material statements. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the director shall revoke the permit. Should the director deny or revoke a permit, the reasons for the denial or revocation are to be stated in writing and hand delivered, by electronic mail, or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 45th business day after the director's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. Violation of any provision of this chapter and any other applicable state laws or city ordinance regulating signage will be grounds for denying a permit or revoking a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this chapter, other applicable ordinances, state or federal law regulating signage, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)	Appeals. The board of appeals shall have the power and duty to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in the denial or revocation of a sign permit under this chapter. All such appeals shall be heard and decided following the notice requirements of subsection (c) of this section and pursuant to the following criteria and procedural requirements: 
(1)	Appeal of decision by administrative officials. A denial or revocation pursuant to this chapter shall be appealable by filing with the secretary of the board of appeals an application for appeal on the forms provided by the community development department specifying the grounds thereof, within 15 calendar days after the action appealed from was taken. The application fee for an appeal under this section shall be the same as that established by the city council for an appeal under chapter 27. 
(2)	Decision of the board. Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the board shall make a determination on each appeal. An appeal shall be sustained only upon an expressed finding by the board that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. 
(3)	Time for final decision. A final decision will be rendered by the board within 90 days from date an appeal is filed. If a final decision is not rendered within the 90-day period, the decision sought to be appealed shall be reversed. 
(c)	Notice of public hearings. Notice of public hearing before the board on any application for appeal or variance shall be provided as follows: 
(1)	Written notice of the nature of the proposed application, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the board shall be mailed by first class mail to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject property as measured by use of the official zoning maps, and as such property owners are listed on the tax records of the city, at least 15 days before the public hearing before the board; 
(2)	Public notification signs shall be posted within the public right-of-way or on the subject property at least 15 days before the hearing before the board. One sign shall be posted for each 500 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof along each street on which the subject property has frontage. Signs shall be double-faced and posted so that the face of the sign is at a right angle to the street in order that said signs can be read by the traveling public in both directions. The lettering on the signs shall be printed and at least one inch in size and the sign shall state the nature of the proposed application and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the board; and 
(3)	Notice of the nature of the proposed application and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the board shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation within the city in which are carried the legal advertisements of the city at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing before the board and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing before the board. 
(4)	The cost of all signs posted, and notice mailings sent, pursuant to this section shall be specifically paid by the applicant in addition to all other applicable application costs. 
(5)	Applications may be withdrawn by the applicant or applicant's representative in writing without prejudice at any time before the vote of the board of appeals on the application. All fees submitted shall be forfeited in any case where the application is withdrawn after it has been advertised for a public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(d)	Certiorari. In the event a person whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of appeals, a person may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-6), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-6), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-08, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 21-27. Permit expiration.
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and fully installed within six months after the date of issuance; provided, however, that where an applicant can demonstrate that a contractor was timely engaged to construct the permitted sign, but the fabrication has not yet been completed due to the fault of the contractor, one 60-day extension may be granted by the director or his designee. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If an individual later desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-7), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-7), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-28. Enforcement and penalties.
(a)	The director may issue a citation for violation of this chapter by any person, including if applicable, the owner, manager or tenant of the lot upon which a sign is located, for a sign erected, altered, maintained, converted, or used in violation of this chapter or in violation of any other applicable ordinance regulating signage, including, but not limited to the building and electrical codes. 
(b)	The director shall have the same duties, authority, and obligations regarding access to private property, inspections, including the procurement of inspection warrants provided in chapter 27 regarding the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)	Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation. For continued violations, citation for each sign issued on separate days shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalties authorized in this Code. 
(d)	The city may seek affirmative equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to cause the removal or repair of any sign in violation of this chapter or other city ordinances. 
(e)	The director, any city employee who operates an assigned city-owned vehicle, or any person contracting with the city for such purpose may, without notice, remove and dispose of any prohibited sign, signal, device or other structure erected, placed or maintained on the dedicated right-of-way of any public road. Such removal and disposal of a prohibited sign, signal, device or other structure shall not preclude the prosecution of any person for erecting, placing or maintaining such item in the dedicated public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-8), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-8), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Secs. 21-29—21-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 21-60. Exemptions.
The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that such signs shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter: 
(1)	Window signs; 
(2)	Standard informational signs; 
(3)	One suspended sign per tenant of a multi-tenant building when the area of the sign is less than six square feet per side and a common design for such signs has been established by the owner and approved by the public authority; 
(4)	Signs for the sole purpose of displaying street numbers assigned by the United States Postal Service not exceeding six inches in height for residential uses and 12 inches in height for nonresidential uses; 
(5)	Flags on lots in all districts and banners on lots in single family residential zoning districts; 
(6)	Nongovernmental traffic control devices in or adjacent to parking areas and driveways and signs located at railroad crossings; 
(7)	Historic signs where: 
a.	The property, building or structure where the historic sign is to be located is designated as a historic property by the city council; and 
b.	A previous sign must have been located on the property. The historic sign's former existence, original design, original size, original colors, original composition and other original aesthetic qualities of the historic sign shall be shown to the director's satisfaction by photographs or other documentation. The new historic sign shall be an exact replica of the original sign located on the property; 
(8)	Signs and warning devices meeting the standards of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and installed or utilized by governmental authority or by persons and entities duly authorized to work on the public rights-of-way while such work is in progress; 
(9)	Sidewalk signs; 
(10)	Out-of-store marketing device. 
(11)	A-frame or easel style signs, so long as though signs are: 
a.	Sign composition material: Wood or metal (dry erase or chalk board style); 
b.	Setback from right-of-way: Must be situated to allow for clear passage with a minimum accessible sidewalk width of 36 inches and compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act; 
c.	In conjunction to a business establishment authorized on the subject lot; and 
d.	Number of signs allowed: One per establishment; 
e.	Maximum height: Three feet; 
f.	Sign area: No larger than six square feet; 
g.	Sign placement per establishment shall not be placed beyond the exterior wall facade per tenant space; 
h.	All sidewalk signs shall be removed daily upon cessation of business hours and shall be stored indoors; 
i.	No sidewalk signs shall be lit, contain neon, or contain plastic construction or embellishment; 
j.	Evidence of neglect or dilapidation of any sidewalk sign shall provide cause for immediate removal; and 
k.	Sidewalk signs shall not require a sign permit or authorization sticker affixed to the subject sign. 
(12)	Wayfinding signs. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-9), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-9), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2017-08-01, § I, 8-8-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-61. Fees.
The cost of a sign permit shall be established by the city council and collected by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-10), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-10), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-62. Prohibited signs.
The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)	Signs placed in the dedicated right-of-way of any public road other than publicly owned or maintained signs and signs pertaining to railroad crossings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the signs permitted during holiday periods as listed in subsections (15) and (20), below, may be placed within the right-of-way; 
(2)	Window signs which exceed 30 percent of the total window area per façade of a business; 
(3)	Signs that contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, as amended; 
(4)	Signs that simulate an official traffic control device, warning sign, or regulatory sign or which hide from view any traffic control device, signal or public service sign; 
(5)	Signs that emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing abilities; 
(6)	Signs that interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic or which otherwise pose a hazard to traffic due to structural deficiencies in the structure of such signs; 
(7)	Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, curb, utility pole, natural feature, or other structure except as may be set forth herein; 
(8)	Animated signs; 
(9)	Signs that obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation or that prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof, as well as signs attached to any fire escape; 
(10)	Signs that do not conform to city building and electrical codes; 
(11)	Signs for which a permit is required that do not display the sign permit number; 
(12)	Roof signs; 
(13)	Multi-faced signs, including: 
a.	Tri-vision signs; and 
b.	LED signs not meeting the standards of section 21-74; 
(14)	Signs erected after the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that are in violation of the rules and regulations; 
(15)	Balloons, pennant streamers or air or gas filled figures and any sign constructed of non-durable material including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard or flexible plastic. This provision does not apply to flags, banners, or special event signs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, air or gas filled figures displayed not more than 30 days before a holiday and removed within 12 days after a holiday shall be exempted from this section; 
(16)	Portable signs; 
(17)	Abandoned signs. Signs (including sign structures) shall be deemed abandoned if it does not present a neat and orderly appearance, which may be manifested by the following; rust or holes on or in the sign or sign structure, or broken, missing, loose or bent parts, faded or flaking paint, non-operative or partially non-operative illuminating or mechanical devices or missing letters in sign copy and/or if the business, service or commercial transaction to which it relates has been discontinued for six months; 
(18)	Any sign that is structurally unsound, or is a hazard to traffic or pedestrians; 
(19)	Illegal signs; 
(20)	Signs consisting in whole or in part of a series, line, or row of lights, whether supported by cables or other physical means, within 150 feet of a street and visible therefrom. Notwithstanding the foregoing holiday lights and decorations displayed not more than 30 days before a holiday and removed within 12 days after a holiday shall be exempted from this section; 
(21)	Feather flags. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-11), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-11), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-09-08, § I(Attch.), 9-22-2020; Ord. No. 2021-11-04, § I, 12-14-2021)
Sec. 21-63. Owner's consent required.
No sign may be permitted or posted on property without the consent of the property's owner or authorized agent. Should it be determined that a sign was erected on a lot pursuant to an alleged agent's incorrect representation that the record owner of the lot in fact gave permission for the erection of a sign, the permit for such sign shall be revoked as provided in section 21-26. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-12), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-12), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-64. Measurement of sign area and height.
(a)	The area of a sign shall be computed as the area within the smallest continuous polygon comprised of not more than eight straight lines enclosing the limits of a sign face, together with any sign face cabinet or frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. If polygons established around wall signs located on the same street oriented wall are within 24 inches or less of one another, then the area of the sign shall be measured within one continuous polygon. For double-faced signs, the side of the sign with the largest sign area shall be used in computing the sign area. For monument signs, sign area includes the face of the structure that the message is affixed to, not including the base subject to compliance with section 21-60(4) for exemption requirements. 
(b)	The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign structure at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of existing grade prior to construction or the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is greater. Where the normal grade is below the normal grade of a public street, the sign base can be raised to the elevation of the normal grade of the street before the height limitations are applied (surveyor's certificate required). 
(Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-13), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-09-08, § I(Attch.), 9-22-2020)
Sec. 21-65. Restrictions for residential uses.
(a)	There shall be a maximum of two monument signs per entrance into any residential subdivision or real estate development for a residential use; 
(b)	Ground signs are prohibited, except for monument signs; 
(c)	No sign for any residential use may be illuminated, except for monument signs, subject to the provisions of section 21-76. No monument sign may be internally illuminated; 
(d)	Monument signs shall not exceed 32 square feet of sign area and shall not exceed six feet in height as measured to the top of the sign structure; 
(e)	No electronic signs are allowed in any residential use if that district is designated by city as a historic district. No electronic signs shall be allowed in any other residential zoning district except one electronic sign per property for a place of worship, private elementary, middle, or high school provided such sign meets all other requirements of this chapter. 
(f)	Entrance wall signs. 
(1)	Single-family residential: One maximum 32-square-foot entry wall or monument sign or two single-faced entry wall or monument signs not to exceed 16 square feet for each side of a platted single family subdivision entrance shall be permitted for each street on which the lot has frontage. Subdivisions with more than one identifiable section, as shown on an approved preliminary plat, may be allowed internal identification monument signs of 16 square feet on one side of the entrance to each section. 
(2)	Townhome and multifamily: Monument signs. One maximum 32-square-foot entry wall or monument sign or two single-faced entrance wall or monument signs not to exceed 16 square feet for each side of the development's entrance shall be permitted for each street on which the multi-family property or property occupied with an institutional use has up to and including 500 linear feet of frontage. The sign shall have a maximum height of six feet (see exception), shall not be internally illuminated unless backlit illumination is used. Except for gas stations, changeable copy shall not be permitted. Notwithstanding the foregoing, monument signs on arterial streets may be ten feet in height. 
(g)	Multifamily residential uses. 
(1)	Signs for multi-family residential uses zoned O-I, OCR, CX, C-1, PR-1, PR-2, MX1 or MX2 shall comply with provisions per section 21-72 for nonresidential use sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-13), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-14), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-09-08, § I(Attch.), 9-22-2020)
Sec. 21-66. Height and setback requirements.
All signs shall be set back as follows, unless a more restrictive setback is specified in conditions of zoning or otherwise in this chapter: 
(1)	Ten feet from the right-of-way or 20 feet from edge of pavement if a private street and no sign shall project over the right-of-way. 
(2)	In the Brookhaven-Peachtree Overlay District, all permanently affixed signs shall be setback at minimum five feet from the right-of-way and outside of the required landscape and pedestrian zones. 
(3)	For a residential use, if the distance between the right-of-way to the front of the principal structure is less than ten feet, signs shall be setback two-thirds of the distance between the curb line and the front of the principal structure on the lot on which the sign is located. 
(4)	Along all lot lines which are not adjacent to a road all signs shall be within the buildable area of the lot. All signs shall be so located and shall provide such vertical clearance as to provide for safe, convenient and unobstructed passage for pedestrians and vehicles. 
(5)	Banners shall be exempt from the setback requirements, but shall not encroach upon the right-of-way. 
(6)	No sign or sign structure above a height of three feet shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. However, a sign support structure not more than ten inches in diameter may be located within the required comer visibility area if all other requirements of this chapter are met and the lowest elevation of the sign surface is at least 12 feet above the ground level. 
(7)	Window signs are only allowed on the ground floor of a building. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-14), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-15), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-67. Convenience stores and service stations with pump islands.
In addition to the signs otherwise allowed in this chapter, convenience stores and service stations with pump islands may have signage subject to the following limitations: 
(1)	Within the limits of the canopy covering the pump islands, one sign per canopy face that is visible from the public street frontage with a maximum of six square feet allowed per canopy sign. 
(2)	Within the limits of the canopy covering the pump islands, pump-island signs shall be limited to no more than two signs per island, not to exceed four square feet per sign. However, total square footage of all pump island signs shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
(3)	Accessory car wash, if a separate drive-through car wash building is on site, one additional wall sign per street facing wall, not to exceed five square feet, may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-15), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-16), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-68. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, adopted July 25, 2017, repealed § 21-68, which pertained to noncommercial messages and derived from Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-16), adopted Sept. 23, 2014 and Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-17), adopted June 9, 2015. 
Sec. 21-69. Wall or projecting signs.
(a)	Wall or projecting signs shall be securely fastened to the building surface. 
(b)	Wall signs greater than 300 square feet shall be confined to the upper 30 feet of the facade. 
(c)	Projecting signs may project from the building up to two feet; provided that no projecting sign shall be maintained less than ten feet above the ground level when erected over pedestrian walkways or driveways and no less than 14 feet above vehicle access. 
(d)	No wall or projecting sign shall extend above the roof line or parapet wall. 
(e)	Exterior walls that are horizontally inset or offset from other wall faces along the same side of a building shall only allow affixed sign structures which maintain a minimum distance of one-foot from the vertical side edges and the horizontal top edge of the wall face. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-17), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-18), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-09-08, § I(Attch.), 9-22-2020)
Sec. 21-70. Monument signs.
The height of all monument signs at their highest point above the level of the ground shall not exceed ten feet for nonresidential uses; however, when the ground level is lower than the level of the adjoining street pavement, then a sign may be raised so as to be no more than ten feet above the level of the pavement. Residential uses shall be governed by section 21-65. The height of any directional sign shall not be more than three feet above the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-18), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-19), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-09-08, § I(Attch.), 9-22-2020)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2020-09-08, § I(Attch.) adopted Sept. 22, 2020, amended § 21-70 and in doing so changed the title of said section from "Ground signs" to "Monument signs," as set out herein. 
Sec. 21-71. Canopy signs.
Canopy signs shall be no less than eight feet above the ground when erected over pedestrian walkways and 14 feet above areas of vehicle service access at the lowest extremity of the sign. No canopy sign shall extend above the parapet wall. The area of the canopy sign shall not exceed ten percent of the area of the canopy. For canopy signs located above flat canopies, the height shall not exceed two feet and the length shall not exceed 50 percent of the length of the canopy. The area of a canopy sign shall be deducted from the allowable area of a wall sign. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-19), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-20), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-72. Nonresidential use regulations.
(a)	In addition to all other applicable regulations in this chapter, all nonresidential uses not developed as a planned commercial center are limited to the following signs: 
TABLE 21-72(a) 


(b)	In lieu of the sign regulations of Table 21-72(a) above, a lot developed as a planned commercial center shall be allowed the following: 
TABLE 21-72(b) 


(c)	No property zoned for nonresidential use may have more than one ground sign that is oriented towards travelers along the same street. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-20), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-21), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-09-08, § I(Attch.), 9-22-2020; Ord. No. 2021-10-02, § I, 10-12-2021)
Sec. 21-73. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, adopted July 25, 2017, repealed § 21-73, which pertained to special event signs and derived from Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-21), adopted Sept. 23, 2014 and Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-22), adopted June 9, 2015. 
Sec. 21-74. Electronic signs.
(a)	Electronic signs shall be allowed as part of a lawfully permitted sign only in C-1, C-2, M, and M-2 zoning districts, but only if the electronic sign complies with all of the following requirements: 
(1)	No message may be displayed for less than six seconds; 
(2)	No message may be repeated at intervals less than three seconds; 
(3)	No segmented message may last longer than ten seconds; 
(4)	No traveling message may travel at a rate slower than 16 light columns per second or faster than 32 light columns per second; 
(5)	Electronic signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of 6,300 nits during the daylight hours and a maximum illumination of 500 nits between dusk to dawn, as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness; and 
(6)	The electronic sign shall be limited to 25 percent of the sign area of the lawfully permitted sign. 
(b)	One electronic sign as part of a lawfully permitted sign shall be allowed for places of worship or for public or private elementary, middle, or high schools, and for other institutional uses so long as the electronic sign complies with all of the following requirements: 
(1)	Electronic monument signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 15 feet, and sign copy area shall be limited to 100-square feet; 
(2)	Electronic signs may only be located along a major or minor thoroughfare; 
(3)	Electronic signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of 6,300 nits during the daylight hours and a maximum illumination of 500 nits between dusk to dawn, as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness; 
(4)	Electronic signs shall contain a default of an electronic freeze and a black screen in the event of a sign malfunction; and 
(5)	The electronic message portion of the sign shall be limited to 25 percent of the 100-square foot sign area of the lawfully permitted sign. 
(c)	No electronic sign shall be illuminated by blinking, scrolling, intermittent, or flashing lights simulating movement. 
(d)	The owner of any electronic sign or the holder of a sign permit for an electronic sign shall be required to submit annual certification to the director by an electrical engineer licensed in the state that the lighting on the electronic sign meets the standards in effect. The annual certification must be submitted to the director no later than January 31 for each year. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-22), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-23), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-09-08, § I(Attch.), 9-22-2020)
Sec. 21-75. Nonconforming signs.
(a)	The city finds that nonconforming signs may adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. Such signs may adversely affect the aesthetic characteristics of the city and may adversely affect public safety due to the visual impact of said signs on motorists and the structural characteristics of said signs. 
(b)	Any nonconforming sign that is not used or leased for a continuous period of six months shall not be reused for sign purposes unless and until it fully conforms with the terms and requirements of this chapter. 
(c)	Illegal signs must be removed within 30 days of notice from the city. 
(d)	No structural repairs, or changes in shape, size or design, to any nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this chapter. Routine maintenance and changing of copy shall be permitted as long as such maintenance or changing of copy does not result in or change the shape, size, or design. Any change from a non-electronic format to an electronic format is considered a change in design and not permitted with respect to a nonconforming sign, unless the sign is brought fully into compliance with all requirements at the time of such change. Signs which are structurally unsound or present a hazard to persons or property must be removed within two days upon notification by the city. 
(e)	A nonconforming sign structure may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign structure, except that a nonconforming sign may be rebuilt where the original sign structure has been damaged or destroyed by nature or an act of God. No such replacement structure may have a sign area or height greater than the original structure. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-23), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-24), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-76. Illumination.
No sign shall give off light that glares, blinds or has any other such adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. Illuminated signs constructed or maintained within 75 feet of any single-family lot property line shall be externally illuminated; provided that emergency rooms operated by hospitals licensed and regulated by the State of Georgia may internally illuminate signage identifying and directing ambulance traffic and traffic to emergency rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-24), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-25), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2021-10-02, § I, 10-12-2021)
Sec. 21-77. Standard informational signs.
The following shall apply to standard informational signs: 
(1)	One sign per lot not to exceed 16 square feet in area, or up to four signs not to exceed an aggregate sign area of 16 square feet. 
(2)	All standard informational signs shall be erected to a height not greater than six feet above ground level. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-25), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-26), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-78. Sidewalk signs.
(a)	The following shall apply to sidewalk signs: 
(1)	Sign composition material: Wood or metal (dry erase or chalk board style). 
(2)	Placement: Must be situated to allow for clear passage with a minimum accessible sidewalk width of 36 inches and compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(3)	Number of signs allowed: One per establishment. 
(4)	Maximum height: Three feet. 
(5)	Sign area: No larger than six square feet. 
(6)	Sign placement per establishment shall not be placed beyond the exterior wall facade per tenant space. 
(7)	All sidewalk signs shall be removed daily upon cessation of business hours and shall be stored indoors. 
(8)	No sidewalk signs shall be lit, contain neon, or contain plastic construction or embellishment. 
(9)	Evidence of neglect or dilapidation of any sidewalk sign shall provide cause for immediate removal. 
(b)	Sidewalk signs shall not require a sign permit or authorization sticker affixed to the subject sign. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-26), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-27), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2017-08-01, § I, 8-8-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-79. Variances.
(a)	Where a literal application of this chapter, due to special circumstances, would result in an unusual hardship in an individual case, a variance may be granted by the board of appeals after receiving evidence that the applicant meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)	Exceptional conditions pertaining to the property where the sign is to be located because of its size, shape, or topography, which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; 
(2)	Granting the variance would not confer on the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to others similarly situated; 
(3)	The exceptional circumstances are not the result of action by the applicant; 
(4)	The requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated; 
(5)	Granting of the variance would not violate more than one standard of this chapter; and 
(6)	Granting the variance would not result in allowing a sign that interferes with road or highway visibility or obstructs or otherwise interferes with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(b)	No variance shall be granted to the height of a sign which increases the height of the sign more than 20 percent of that allowed by this chapter. 
(c)	No variance shall be granted which increases the size of a sign more than 20 percent of that allowed by this chapter. 
(d)	No variance shall be granted to increase the size or height of a banner, sidewalk, wayfinding, construction or standard informational signage. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-27), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-28), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-02-02, § I, 2-12-2019; Ord. No. 2019-05-08, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 21-80. Flags.
(a)	All flags greater than two square feet shall be displayed on flagpoles, which may be vertical or mast arm flagpoles. In nonresidential districts, flagpoles shall not exceed the height allowed in the applicable zoning district, or 60 feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles in single family residential districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. 
(b)	The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height. The hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 20 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. In addition, flags are subject to the following limitations: 


(c)	Each lot shall be allowed a maximum of two flagpoles. 
(d)	A maximum of two flags shall be allowed per flagpole. 
(e)	A vertical flagpole must be set back from all property boundaries a distance which is at least equal to the height of the flagpole. 
(f)	Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable shall be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used and flags which are torn or frayed shall not be displayed. 
(g)	On officially designated city, state, or federal holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number or other limitations on display. 
(h)	This section shall not be construed to restrict the right to display eligible flags as banners or noncommercial signage as provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-28), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-29), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-81. Banners.
Banners shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)	Each banner shall not exceed 24 square feet in size and no banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than eight feet above grade when on the ground; 
(2)	Each banner must be individually attached to poles, mast arms, or other structures; 
(3)	No more than one banner shall be displayed per street frontage; 
(4)	Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 14 days with no more than three such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per business; 
(5)	Each residential use may display one banner not exceeding 24 square feet, without receiving a permit. No banner shall be displayed longer than 14 days. However, this 14-day period shall begin on the date when a notice is provided by the city in response to a complaint filed with the city or observed by code enforcement; 
(6)	Subsection (4) of this section shall not apply to private schools and places of worship located in residential zoning districts. For the identified land uses, banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 20 days with no more than eight such 20-day periods permitted per calendar year per lot; and 
(7)	All banners must be maintained in good condition as provided for flags in section 21-80. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09-04, § 1(21-29), 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-30), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Sec. 21-82. Wayfinding signage.
(a)	Location. Wayfinding signs shall not be affixed or otherwise attached to trees, traffic signals, benches, street signs, or fencing, and shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Signs must allow for a minimum five-foot-wide clear pedestrian pathway to and from all building entrances and exits. 
(2)	Signs for courtyard entries shall be limited to one sign for all businesses located within the courtyard, utilizing the same common entry. Signs shall be located within ten feet of the courtyard entrance. 
(b)	Size. Wayfinding signs shall be a maximum of 16 square feet in area and ten feet in height. 
(c)	Design. Wayfinding signs shall have a compatible design, be constructed of durable materials with a substantial base and landscape plantings, and colors that complement the existing allowable signage for the center subject to the approval of the director or his designee. 
(d)	Miscellaneous.
(1)	Signs shall not be internally illuminated; provided that way finding signage directing ambulances and/or persons or traffic to emergency rooms operated by hospitals licensed and regulated by the State of Georgia may utilize internal illumination. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-31), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-07-03, § I, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2021-10-02, § I, 10-12-2021)
Sec. 21-83. Outdoor marketing device.
(a)	Location. An outdoor marketing device is allowed as accessory to a nonresidential principal land use. 
(b)	Placement. 
(i)	Outdoor marketing devices shall be limited to positioning adjacent to a principal building facade with a public entrance. 
(ii)	Placement of outdoor marketing devices shall not encroach into the minimum dimensional requirements of pedestrian circulation pathways, in accordance with Chapter 27 Article VIII Division 6. 
(iii)	The marketing device shall not be located within the minimum setback, landscape areas, or transitional buffers. 
(iv)	If located within a parking lot, the marketing device shall not reduce the number of parking spaces beyond the minimum required within the zoning district for the subject property. 
(v)	Outdoor vending machines shall meet the state and federal ADA accessibility requirements. 
(c)	Dimensions. 
(i)	The maximum height of an outdoor marketing device is 84-inches. 
(ii)	The maximum width of an outdoor marketing device is 78-inches. 
(iii)	The maximum depth of an outdoor marketing device is 36-inches. 
(d)	illumination. Outdoor marketing devices shall not be illuminated except for illumination intrinsic to the device. 
(e)	Permitting. Outdoor marketing devices requiring the installation of new electrical, plumbing, or mechanical connections shall require the applicable permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-32), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-08-01, § I, 8-8-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2023-03-01, § I, 3-14-2023)
Sec. 21-84. Construction sign.
The following regulations apply to construction signs: 
(1)	One additional sign shall be allowed during construction on all zoning districts; 
(2)	The sign shall not be illuminated, not exceed 16 square feet in area and six feet in height above ground level; and 
(3)	The sign shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06-02, § 1(21-33), 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-03-05, § I, 3-27-2018)
Chapter 22 SOLID WASTE
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved receptacle for residential solid waste means a container approved by the collector. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable. 
Approved receptacle for yard debris trimmings means a biodegradable paper bag, empty card board box, clean galvanized metal container or durable plastic container with a capacity of not less than 20 gallons and no more than 40 gallons. Containers shall have two durable handles on the sides thereof or a bail by which it may be lifted. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not constitute an approved receptacle for yard debris trimmings. 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and/or similar locations or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from the individual's own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial container means a manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director. The following general standards are prescribed for commercial containers: 
(1)	All containers must be steel, continuous welded and properly reinforced. 
(2)	All lids will be flanged and reinforced for strength. 
(3)	Pickup side of container shall be reinforced inside or outside at point of torque tub contact. 
(4)	Inside reinforcement shall be pressed steel angle. 
(5)	Bottoms shall be reinforced with 1.5 drain plug installed flush to bottom. 
(6)	All containers shall be primed and finished with enamel and epoxy paint. 
(7)	Body dimensions as to length and height of container can vary with the size of container; however, all container widths will be 70 inches. Minimum gauges of steel shall be as follows: 


Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house, roominghouse, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a single dwelling unit/residential unit and condominiums. 
Commercial front loader container means a manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director. 
Commercial/industrial solid waste means solid waste from commercial establishments that includes but is not limited to material from industrial processes, manufacturing canneries, slaughterhouses, packing plants, poultry processing plants or similar industries, and food waste. 
Compactor container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with a self-contained compacting mechanism or an external compactor which is designed to be used in conjunction with the individual home appliance. 
Compactor front loader container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with an external mechanical compacting system that detaches in order to be serviced by driving forward to the container using a commercial front loader vehicle. 
Compactor roll-off container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with an internal or external mechanical compacting system that either detaches or is fully self-contained and is serviced by backing up to the container and hoisting it onto a commercial roll-off container vehicle. 
Condominium means individual ownership units in a multifamily structure with a front and back entrance to each unit on the ground level. 
Construction and demolition solid waste means solid waste from construction and demolition projects that include but is not limited to remodeling, repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, multiple dwellings and other structures such as concrete, bricks, plaster, stone, earth, lumber, roofing materials, gutters, shavings and sawdust. 
Construction debris or construction waste means discarded building materials, concrete truck washout (liquid and solid portions), chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. 
Construction site operator means the person(s) generally recognized as the individual(s) having authority over site construction activities and is responsible for the management of solid waste, including construction generated waste. 
Conveyance means any automobile, plane, train, bus, bicycle, motorcycle or other method of transporting persons from one place to another. 
Department means the public works department or its successor. 
Director means the director of the public works department or designee. 
Discard means to throw, abandon, place, deposit, discharge, dump, bury, burn or dispose of a substance. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means waste including but not limited to food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste that does not meet the toxic characteristic leachate procedure requirements and includes but is not limited to highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; industrial sludge; and other waste material that the director determines to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials. 
Incinerator means the high temperature waste combustion unit designed to dispose of pathological matter. 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Litter means, but is not limited to, any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, yard debris, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description but the term "litter" does not include "waste" as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6), as amended. 
Multiple dwelling means a building designed for and containing two or more dwelling units. 
Municipal solid waste means, but is not limited to, any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard debris not separated for recycling and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Noncombustible trash means, but is not limited to, materials which are unburnable in the incinerator or at incinerator temperature of 800 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit such as mineral water, metal furniture, large metal scraps and wires, auto bodies or parts, and other similar materials. 
Owner means any person or entity that generates solid waste on real property in the city and who is designated by the records of the office of tax commissioner as the owner of such real property within the city. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of at least 1.5 mils and not exceeding a 32-gallon capacity. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and land used for business, residential, commercial, industrial, or farm purposes. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Recycle means any process by which materials that would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish or commercial refuse. 
Residential unit means any freestanding structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one family. 
Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of putrescible waste on land for final disposition and/or management. 
Sanitation or sanitary district means designated service areas established by this Code or by a contract with a municipality. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded materials including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operation materials; solid or dissolved matters in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended and as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33). 
Special industrial waste container means any container such as a metal box, bucket, an open bed container or special container used for transporting chemicals, paint, metals, glass, oil products, plastics or any type of material that requires special handling and cannot be incinerated. 
Stationary compactor means an object of refuse container system which compacts refuse at the site of generation into a pull-on detachable container. 
Tax commissioner means the constitutional officer charged with collecting both state, county and special taxes. 
Yard debris means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-1, 1-15-2013; Ord. No. 2020-10-02, § I(attch.), 10-13-2020)
Sec. 22-2. Applicability.
This chapter applies to the preparation and storage, collection, transportation and disposal of all refuse in the city, including all public and private property. This chapter prescribes rules and regulations therefore, regulates the collection of garbage and refuse, provides for the licensing and regulation of private garbage and refuse collection, prescribes rules and regulations for hauling garbage, refuse and other waste material within or through the city, and prohibits the unlawful deposit of litter within the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-2, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-3. Private transportation of refuse.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person including city refuse collectors and sanitary contractors to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any refuse, including discarded building material or discarded furniture, upon or along the public streets and roadways except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking or being blown from transporting vehicles. The operator or owner of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person not licensed by the city to collect and haul any refuse other than that arising from such person's own accumulation within any areas of the city in which refuse collection service is maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-3, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-4. Disposal of refuse and garbage generally.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or to cause to be dumped any garbage, refuse, litter, junk, appliances, equipment, cans, bottles, paper, lumber, trees, tree limbs, brush or parts thereof anywhere in the city except as may be permitted by city regulations at the incinerator or sanitary landfills operated by the city or county without the expressed approval by action of the city council under such terms and conditions as may be invoked from time to time by the city council. 
(b)	The provisions of subsection (a) of this section do not apply to the dumping on private property with the owner's permission and applicable city land disturbance or building permits of sand, dirt, broken dirt, blocks, broken pavement or other suitable material for use as a fill to raise the elevation of the land, provided it is not maintained in an unsightly condition and provided the owner or owners of the property on which such material is dumped agrees to level such dumped material with appropriate grading equipment and assess the cost thereof against the real property on which such material was dumped. 
(c)	If any of the matter or material dumped in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent to or received by, or to have been the property of any person prior to its being dumped as prohibited therein, this identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that the owner dumped or caused to be dumped such matter and material in violation of this chapter. 
(d)	For information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person violating the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of any state law prohibiting the dumping of garbage, refuse or litter on any public or private property within the city, the city council shall pay a reward in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, to the person furnishing such information leading to such arrest and conviction and such monies as may be a necessary cost of the operation and administration of the city government. 
(e)	All compactors containing combustible materials emptied at a city disposal facility will pay the price per ton established in section 22-23. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-4, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-5. Operation of private landfills.
(a)	No sanitary landfill or dump shall be operated within the city without written approval of the city and the state. 
(b)	Sanitary landfill and landfill hours of operation shall be limited to 18 hours each day, from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, unless daily cover is applied and utilized in the manner described in the sanitary landfill's or landfill's design and operating plan approved by the state environmental protection division. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-5, 1-15-2013)
Secs. 22-6—22-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CITY COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE
Sec. 22-16. Notice to owner, occupant of unacceptable container or area.
The city, upon determining that a can, container or area is becoming or has become unserviceable or unsanitary or likely to cause an unsanitary condition, shall issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the can, container or condition exists to inform such person of the condition existing. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-26, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-17. Pickup routes and districts established.
The areas of the city shall be divided into pickup routes by the sanitation provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-27, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-18. Preparation and storage of residential refuse for collection; placement; unacceptable refuse.
It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to keep all refuse pending collection and disposal as follows: 
(1)	All garbage shall be free from liquid and initially placed in watertight plastic bags with the tops of such bags securely closed. The owner shall then place the closed plastic bags in an approved receptacle for residential solid waste to be collected and removed by the appropriate city designee. 
(2)	Other household refuse will be containerized in disposable containers (box, watertight or plastic bag) except that tree branches and heavy brush which will not fit into containers shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four feet in length and stacked in a compact pile on the parkway in front of the residence adjoining the curb, but these piles shall not extend into the street. Sticks, hedge clippings and small brush shall be gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed four feet in length nor weigh more than 50 pounds. Logs and limbs over four inches in diameter or over four feet long will not be collected. 
(3)	Noncombustible trash and liquids will not be collected and shall be disposed of by other means. 
(4)	All refuse receptacles, except single-use paper or plastic bags, single-use paper or cardboard boxes, shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective insecticide if necessary to prevent nuisance. 
(5)	It shall be the duty of the occupant of any single residential unit, condominium or multiple residential unit not serviced by a commercial container to place refuse receptacles, watertight paper or plastic bags securely tied, rubbish and bundles, on assigned collection days, at a front curbside location in such a manner as not to obstruct passage; except that the residential superintendent may require it to be placed on any side of a property for the reasons of topography or efficiency. It shall also be the duty of the occupant to place the refuse at an appropriate curbside location prior to the arrival of the sanitation truck; this placement shall not be made before 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection day. Any refuse placed on the curb after the departure of the pickup crew shall be at the peril of the owner and the owner shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this chapter should the street become littered from the refuse. 
(6)	It shall be the duty of the occupant to remove containers from the curbside location to the storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; the removal shall be accomplished not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day the contents are emptied and collected. 
(7)	Each owner shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property such person occupies or the public thoroughfares adjoining the property. 
(8)	It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquid or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(9)	Inoperative, privately used or worn out household appliances (refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers, discarded furniture) will be collected at the curb on an on-call basis to the sanitation provider. 
(10)	Commercial waste generated from the conduct of business or commercial enterprise carried on from residential units will not be collected except on a special fee basis. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-28, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-19. Preparation and storage of commercial and multiple dwelling refuse for collection.
(a)	Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial establishment, condominium or multiple dwelling, arrangements for the storage of refuse and location of containers must be approved by the city. 
(b)	Commercial containers at existing commercial establishments and multiple dwellings shall be placed at locations approved by the city. Refuse will not be collected from commercial establishments or multiple dwellings unless it is placed in commercial containers, properly located. Cardboard boxes shall be flattened and placed in containers. 
(c)	Where the occupants of two or more commercial establishments share the use of a refuse can or commercial container, it shall be the joint responsibility of the users to maintain the area surrounding such cans or containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(d)	The occupant, or occupants, of commercial establishments and the management of multiple dwellings serviced by commercial containers shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding such commercial containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(e)	All garbage and rubbish shall be free of liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags with the tops secured prior to placing in commercial containers. 
(f)	Commercial containers containing any of the following items will not be emptied: 
(1)	Large household or industrial appliances. 
(2)	Furniture. 
(3)	Tires. 
(4)	Wooden crates. 
(5)	Logs or limbs over four feet in length or four inches in diameter. 
(6)	Bed springs. 
(7)	Rock, dirt, concrete blocks, etc. 
(8)	Uncontainerized garbage, yard debris and household trash. 
(g)	Normal household appliances will be collected on a special fee basis at multiple dwellings served by commercial containers, when placed adjacent to the commercial container and reported to the sanitation provider. 
(h)	It is unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-29, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-20. Collection of refuse generally; conditions for collection.
(a)	Refuse may be collected for disposal by persons or commercial sanitation firms licensed by the city, or by other governments by intergovernmental agreements. 
(b)	Refuse will be collected under the following conditions: 
(1)	Refuse will be collected once each week from residential units except for exceptionally large piles of limbs which may require an excessive period of time to load. 
(2)	Refuse will be collected as often as six times a week from commercial establishments. 
(3)	Dead animals (other than dogs and house pets) will not be collected, and dead dogs and house pets will be collected only from animal hospitals, curbsides and public rights-of-way. Dead house pets shall be in a plastic bag and placed at the curb. They will be collected on a special fee basis and on an on-call basis by the sanitation provider. Large dead animals shall be disposed of by burying on the individual's property to whom the animal belongs as the city has no responsibility to supply service for the removal and disposal of large dead animals. 
(4)	Collection service shall be discontinued where garbage or trash cans or commercial containers are inadequate or have been condemned as unfit by an inspector and notice has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises who has refused to correct the situation then existing. 
(c)	The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, rock or discarded furniture and appliances from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors except on a special fee basis. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-30, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-21. Garbage collection for disabled persons.
(a)	Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit who is disabled to the extent of being incapable of moving refuse and shall obtain a physician's certificate as to this disability shall not be required to place the refuse at curbside. This section does not apply unless all of the persons in a residential unit are disabled and obtain a physician's certificate. These certificates will be mailed to the sanitation provider for appropriate notification of pickup crews. This subsection also applies to temporary disability not to exceed 90 days (extensions are required). 
(b)	Residential cans shall not be placed more than 150 feet from the curb or road edge, nor will refuse cans be picked up if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)	Gates are locked. 
(2)	Gates are wired or tied shut. 
(3)	Dogs are loose in yard. 
(4)	Cans are in carports or garages. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-31, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-22. Billing for sanitation services done by county and/or sanitation provider.
(a)	Commercial establishments. All fees for sanitary services for commercial establishments will be billed directly from the sanitation provider to the commercial establishment. 
(b)	Residential units.
(1)	All fees for sanitary services assessed against residential units shall be assessed upon the tax commissioner's books for each year and shall be collected by the tax commissioner. In collection of these sanitary fees, the tax commissioner shall be allowed to resort to any remedy or right allowed by law for the collection and payment of city taxes. 
(2)	It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to prepare and mail to each owner of a residential unit in the city an annual billing for sanitary services. This sanitary billing will appear as a separate line item assessment on the owner's annual property tax bill and shall become due and payable at the same time that property taxes are due and payable. If such sanitary billing remains unpaid, the tax commissioner or authorized designee, shall have the authority to issue a fi. fa. or execution against the property served, which fi. fa. or execution shall have the same lien dignity and priority as fi. fa.'s or executions issued for county taxes. Each annual installment shall become a lien against the property served on January 1 of each year in the same manner that a lien attaches for city taxes, and such lien shall cover the property of the owner until such billing for sanitary services is paid. Any sanitary billing amount that remains unpaid shall accrue penalty, interest and fi. fa. charges in the same manner and at the same rate as delinquent city taxes. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-32, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-23. Burning combustible materials in containers.
No person shall burn or attempt to burn or cause to be burned in any container used for refuse collection purposes any combustible material of any nature. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-34, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-24. Yard trimmings disposal restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, all yard trimmings shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste; 
(2)	Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at municipal solid waste disposal facilities having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion; 
(3)	Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling; 
(4)	Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible; 
(5)	It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to separate yard trimmings from all other municipal solid waste; 
(6)	Yard trimmings shall not be placed in a plastic bag but shall be placed in an "approved receptacle for yard trimmings" as defined in this chapter. All other requirements of this chapter regarding containing yard trimmings and refuse shall apply. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-35, 1-15-2013)
Secs. 22-25—22-33. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PRIVATE SERVICES
Sec. 22-34. Definition.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial sanitation firm includes any person or entity engaged in the business of operating a sanitary compactor. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-51, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-35. License.
(a)	No person shall engage in the business of operating a commercial sanitation firm without a license issued by the city. A license application in compliance with this section shall be submitted to the community development department for approval or other disposition. 
(b)	Applications are available and may be submitted at city hall. 
(c)	Each application shall have attached a list showing the type, size and location of stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers and/or industrial waste materials to be serviced by the applicant. A commercial sanitation firm applying for a permit to operate stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers or industrial waste containers shall certify at the time of application that the applicant or any corporate officer of the firm is not engaged in any illegal servicing of any commercial containers or refuse collection of any type in the sanitation district. 
(d)	Approved licenses shall become effective on the first day of the calendar year. The fee to be paid to the city for each approved application shall be as established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. The fee shall be prorated for the remainder of the calendar year from the day this license is approved. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-52, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-36. Performance bond.
Each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall post a performance bond with the city in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-53, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-37. Monthly charge for each container in use.
In addition, each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall pay a monthly charge in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, for each stationary compactor container or industrial waste container in use on the last day of each month. This fee shall be paid on or before the 15th day of each succeeding month for which the service was rendered. A schedule of the location of each stationary compactor shall accompany the payment of the fees. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-54, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-38. Decals on trucks.
Each truck used by a commercial sanitation firm to collect and transport combustible solid waste shall bear a decal issued by the department. The issuance and placement of the decal must be as authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-55, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-39. Decals, identification on compactors, containers.
Each stationary compactor and industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous spot a decal issued by the city which shows it has been properly permitted to operate in the city. In addition each stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous spot the name, telephone number and address of the firm permitted to service the stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container. Any arrangement between firms to service another's units must receive written approval from the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-56, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-40. Installation of stationary compactor unit; prior approval of plans.
Plans and specifications for installing a stationary compactor unit shall be approved by the city prior to the installation. All stationary compactor shredders and stationary compactor containers shall be installed on class A, 3,000 psi concrete pads of not less than six inches thickness. All installations shall comply with the requirements of the county mechanical code, fire code and health regulations. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-57, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-41. Special permit for handling special industrial waste.
Special permits shall be granted to firms holding stationary compactor permits for the installation of special industrial waste containers to handle refuse requiring special handling or special equipment. No special industrial waste container shall be emptied at the incinerator. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-58, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-42. Establishment contracting services exempt from sanitary assessment.
A commercial establishment which contracts with a firm licensed to operate a stationary compactor service shall not be required to pay a sanitary assessment while it uses the stationary compactor service, provided additional service is not supplied by the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-59, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-43. Disposal of collected refuse.
Licensees under this article shall dispose of their stationary compactor refuse and all acceptable industrial waste container refuse at approved and licensed disposal facilities. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-60, 1-15-2013)
Secs. 22-44—22-74. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SCRAP TIRE DISPOSAL
Sec. 22-75. Intent and purpose.
The city council finds that protection of the environment is vital to the health, safety, welfare and economic progress of the city and its citizens. Therefore, it is the intent of this article to develop regulations and procedures that govern scrap tires from the point of generation to the point of disposal. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-62, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-76. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber, or similar materials to make a product with economic value, or in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilizes the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration or pyrolysis of waste tires, chips or similar materials. 
Environmental code enforcement officer means an officer of the city authorized by this Code to write official warnings and citations to ensure compliance with this article and the solid waste code. This definition shall include anyone designated by the city as a sanitation inspector. 
Manifest means a document used to identify the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, hereinafter referred to as EPD. 
Mixed tires means a heterogeneous group of tires consisting of used, retreadable casings and scrap tires. 
Recycle means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Retreadable casing means a tire suitable for retreading. 
Reused tire means a tire used for purposes, approved by the EPD, other than intended, such as playground equipment, offshore reefs, and erosion control. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its originally intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires, not otherwise exempted, for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end use, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages and service stations. 
Scrap tire processing means any method, system, or other treatment designed to change the physical form, size, or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, building, and other elements) and includes processing by: shredding, chopping, chipping, baling, splitting, recycling or sorting of scrap tires. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the EPD to receive tires from scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers or the general public for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generators, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casing from scrap tires. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operation materials; solid or dissolved matters in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended and as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33). 
Tire means a continuous, solid or pneumatic covering designed for encircling the wheel of a vehicle that is not permanently attached to the vehicle or a part of the vehicle as original equipment. 
Tire handling business means any person that derives 15 percent or more of its gross income from the sale, processing, transporting or disposal of tires. 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
Ultimate consumer means the last person who receives and uses a new replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be, but are not limited to: individual, leasing and private companies purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleets and government agencies. 
Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of 2/32 foot of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose. It must be inventoried and marketed in substantially the same fashion as a new tire, and the dealer must be able to provide satisfactory evidence to the county that a market exists, and that the used tires are in fact being marketed. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-63, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-77. Dumping of scrap tires.
It shall be unlawful to dump scrap tires or cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in the city including the following: 
(1)	Any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; and 
(2)	Any river, canal, stream, creek, or fresh water lake; and 
(3)	Any public property or private property not owned or maintained by the alleged violator. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-64, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-78. Scrap tire storage, handling, and disposal.
(a)	The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., as amended, are hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)	It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of property to store all scrap tires in a manner that will not adversely affect the public health and safety. 
(c)	It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of property to store all scrap tires in a manner that is consistent with federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-65, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-79. Accumulation.
(a)	No person may store more than 100 scrap tires anywhere in the city. Any person storing in excess of 100 scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this part. The following exceptions shall apply: 
(1)	A solid waste disposal site permitted by the division if permitted by the EPD if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; 
(2)	A tire retailer with not more than 3,000 scrap tires in storage; 
(3)	A tire retreader with not more than 1,500 scrap tires in storage so long as the scrap tires are of the type that the retreader is actively retreading; 
(4)	An auto salvage yard with not more than 500 scrap tires in storage; and 
(5)	A scrap tire processor approved by the division so long as the number of scrap tires in storage do no exceed the quantity approved by the EPD. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to store scrap tires except in a container, located outside of an authorized business, enclosed on all four sides by a solid screen and having a secure top cover to prevent the accumulation of water in the container. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-66, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-80. Compliance.
(a)	Scrap tire generator. Any person who generates scrap tires shall obtain a scrap tire generator identification number issued by EPD and shall maintain copies of manifests for any scrap tires that have been shipped or removed from the business location within the past 36 months. Separate identification numbers are required for each generator having multiple generation locations. 
(1)	The manifests shall include the following information: 
a.	Name and identification number of the generator; 
b.	Number and total tonnage (accurate to within ten percent of actual number) of scrap tires to be transported; 
c.	Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier; 
d.	Date of transport; 
e.	Destination of scrap tires; and 
f.	Signatures of the scrap tire generator, scrap tire carrier and scrap tire processor. 
(2)	The completed manifest and the scrap tire generator identification number shall be made available to the environmental code enforcement officer upon request. 
(3)	Scrap tire generator identification numbers are not transferable; and each generator shall ensure that the scrap tire section of the EPD approves the carrier being used to transport scrap tires. 
(b)	Scrap tire carrier. It shall be the responsibility of the carrier to return a completed copy of the manifest to the scrap tire generator within 30 days from the date on which the scrap tire carrier takes possession of the scrap tires. The date the scrap tire carrier takes possession of the scrap tires shall be indicated on the manifest. 
(c)	Tire handling businesses. All tire handling businesses shall maintain an accurate inventory of all new and used tires received at the place of business, sold to a consumer, sent to another tire handling businesses, or shipped to an approved processor. Inventory and quarterly transport reports shall be kept on site and made available for inspection by environmental code enforcement officers. Quarterly reports shall be sent to the city director of public works and shall include the following information: 
(1)	Name of company that transported tires; 
(2)	Name of owner of company and driver of transport vehicle; 
(3)	Telephone number of transport company; 
(4)	Valid environmental protection division scrap tire program transportation identification number; and 
(5)	Type of vehicle used to transport tires. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-67, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-81. Enforcement.
(a)	Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the city community development director or his designee. 
(b)	The environmental code enforcement officers are authorized to enforce this article on behalf of the city, and shall be empowered to enter private property, with the owner's consent, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violation of this article. If the owner does not consent to such entry on private property for inspection, such officer shall obtain a warrant to enter upon the property. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-68, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-82. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00 or up to 30 days' imprisonment, or both. Upon conviction, the court may also order the convicted person to remove any scrap tires that have been accumulated in violation of this article from the property. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-69, 1-15-2013)
Secs. 22-83—22-107. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. LITTER CONTROL
Sec. 22-108. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)	To provide for uniform prohibition of littering on public or private property throughout the city; 
(2)	To prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter; and 
(3)	To preserve the value of the many unique natural resources in the city and enhance the beauty and quality of life enjoyed by the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-71, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-109. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-72, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-110. Compatibility with other regulations.
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence and shall control. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-73, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-111. Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any operator of a conveyance or any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property or in any waters within the city unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to leave or deposit litter on such property; or 
(2)	The litter is placed into an approved receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any operator of a conveyance to allow any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing litter out of any conveyance onto any public or private property or in any waters within the city unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to leave or deposit litter on such property; or 
(2)	The litter is placed into an approved receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any construction site operator to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of construction site debris or construction site waste on any public or private property or in waters within the city unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to leave or deposit litter on such property; or 
(2)	The litter is placed into an approved receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-74, 1-15-2013; Ord. No. 2020-10-02, § I(attch.), 10-13-2020)
Sec. 22-112. Litter control responsibilities.
Owners must place all of their residential solid waste within durable plastic bags and securely tie the plastic bag prior to placing it in an approved receptacle for residential solid waste. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-75, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-113. Vehicle loads causing litter; commercial front loader containers.
(a)	No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(b)	All commercial front loader containers must meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)	Containers must be steel, continuously welded and properly reinforced according to manufacturer's specifications; 
(2)	Lids must be constructed of durable plastic and reinforced for strength; 
(3)	The pickup side of the container shall be reinforced inside or outside at the point of torque tub contact; 
(4)	The inside reinforcement of the container shall be pressed steel angle; 
(5)	The bottoms of the containers shall be reinforced with a 1.5-inch drain plug installed flush to the bottom; 
(6)	All containers shall be primed and finished with enamel and epoxy paint; 
(7)	Body dimensions as to length and height of container can vary with the size of container; however, all container widths shall be 70 inches; and 
(8)	Minimum gauges of steel for such containers shall be as follows: 


(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-76, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-114. Evidence.
(a)	Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)	Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-78, 1-15-2013)
Sec. 22-115. Violations, enforcement and penalties.
(a)	Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this article, upon conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-11. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)	Upon conviction of any violation of this article, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $200.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(c)	Upon conviction, the court may order the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the convicted person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the sentence. 
(d)	Upon conviction, the court may order the convicted person to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the sentence. 
(e)	Upon conviction, the court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article in the legal organ of the county. 
(f)	All city law enforcement agencies and officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. Primary enforcement responsibilities for litter control are shared by the officers of the code enforcement division and the city police department. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-54, § 22-79, 1-15-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Chapter 23 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 23-1. Procedures for changing street names.
(a)	An application requesting a street name change shall be submitted to the community development department and contain the following: 
(1)	A written petition bearing signatures of a minimum of 51 percent of the property owners fronting the street. The property owners signing shall also constitute a minimum of 51 percent of the linear street frontage. Linear street frontage shall include frontage of properties that abut both sides of the street right-of-way. 
(2)	Existing and proposed street names. 
(3)	Reason for requesting change. 
(4)	Map showing street or portion of street affected by change. 
(5)	A filing fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)	The application shall be processed and scheduled for public hearing as follows: 
(1)	The proposed name shall be checked by the city to ensure nonduplication. 
(2)	Public hearings before the planning commission and the city council may coincide with the schedule for rezoning cases adopted annually by the city council. 
(3)	The city shall notify, by regular mail, all owners of record who have property fronting on the affected street, according to tax records available to the department, of the time and place of the public hearings. The postmaster shall also be notified of the hearings by regular mail. 
(4)	Legal notice of the application and the date, time and place of the public hearings shall be published in the official legal organ of the city at least ten days prior to the first public hearing. 
(5)	The application shall be forwarded with the community development department's recommendation to the planning commission for consideration at the scheduled public hearing and then forwarded to the board with the recommendations of the community development department and the planning commission. 
(6)	The final decision on the proposed change shall be made by the city council after having held the scheduled public hearing. 
(7)	Petitioners shall bear all costs necessary for street marker changes as determined by the city. 
(c)	Applications affecting the same street or portion thereof shall not be submitted more than once every 24 months. 
(d)	Requests initiated by any department or agency of the city shall be submitted to the community development department. Review and processing procedures shall be the same as that of a property owner's application except that the fee and a property owner's petition shall not be required in requests of this nature. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-1, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-2. Construction work on major streets, intersections; time restrictions.
No construction work or maintenance work shall be done within the traffic lanes of major through streets or intersections thereof from the hours of 7:00 to 9:00 a.m., and 4:00 to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. All underground construction work shall be paved or covered with steel plates during such rush hours or at other times when construction is not being accomplished. This section does not apply to emergency repairs. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-2, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-3. Public transportation carrier transit bus stop shelters.
Bus stop shelters may be erected on private property, public streets, public property, or public rights-of-way by a public transportation carrier or as authorized by a public transportation carrier, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	Plans and specifications for the proposed installations shall be submitted and approved by the city in accordance with city requirements. 
(2)	Bus stop shelters may be erected at any bus stop utilized by a public transportation carrier. 
(3)	The owner or constructor of the bus stop shelter shall be responsible for the maintenance of the structure. 
(4)	A bus stop shelter may be erected only at bus stops identified by a public transportation carrier providing service to that location. The public transportation carrier may contract with appropriate subcontractors to provide and maintain bus stop shelters at various locations. 
(5)	Bus stop shelters may carry advertising placed upon them, subject to the following rules or regulations: 
a.	Such advertising matter must be attached to the shelter and not extend out beyond the parameters of the shelter; 
b.	Bus stop shelters carrying advertising matter must be constructed so as not to obstruct vision triangles at intersecting driveways and rights-of-way; 
c.	Advertising shall not violate ordinances or state law obscenity provisions; 
d.	Advertising shall not contain flashing lights or lights that would interfere with motorists on the roadway. 
e.	Comply with all city, state and federal regulations. 
(6)	A bus stop shelter must conform to the reasonable rules and regulations established under this section, including the following: 
a.	Bus stop shelters should be at least 48 inches from the curb, where no curb or gutter is present the front of the bus shelter shall be at least ten feet from the edge of the main traveled roadway; 
b.	Bus stop shelters shall permit a clearance of at least 48 inches on pedestrian paths, driveways, sidewalks, drainage structures, etc.; 
c.	Sides and/or internal dividers in shelters shall be constructed to provide visibility of waiting passengers to the oncoming traffic flow on the road, highway or street on which the shelter is located, provided, however, one double-faced panel containing advertising may be attached to the end of the shelter farthest from the traffic flow on the side of the street on which the shelter is located; 
d.	Each bus stop shelter shall be properly lighted to ensure public safety and provide complete visibility of the shelter from the abutting roadway; 
e.	Comply with all city, state and federal regulations. 
(7)	On application by a public transportation carrier or a contractor authorized by a public transportation carrier to provide bus stop shelters to a public transportation carrier, a permit shall be issued to build a shelter and allow advertising thereon unless there is adequate reason for denying the permit. 
(8)	Any public transportation carrier which provides more than one bus stop shelter shall make application for a permit to cover each of its various locations. 
(9)	An application for a building permit for construction of a bus shelter shall be submitted and accompanied by the following: 
a.	Authorization and approval of the public transportation carrier and the state department of transportation. 
b.	Plans and specifications for the proposed installation. 
c.	If a bus shelter is to be erected or maintained on property other than the right-of-way of a public road or street, an authorization of the owner of the property. 
(10)	The public transportation carrier shall remove the shelter upon the request of the city upon the city showing that such shelter poses a traffic hazard, impediment to pedestrian traffic or other reasonable cause. 
(11)	Notwithstanding any other ordinance or part of an ordinance prohibited the construction of bus stop shelters or commercial advertising on public rights-of-way, a bus stop shelter complying with the provisions of this section may be constructed on public rights-of-way and have commercial advertising placed thereon and the provisions of this section shall control such construction and advertisement. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-5, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-4. Permit, franchise fee required prior to installation of poles, pipes, etc., on public roads or alleys.
(a)	No person shall install, construct, maintain or cause to be installed, constructed or maintained any pipe, main, conduit, cable, wire, pole, tower, traffic or other signal and other equipment, facilities, appliance, receptacle or sign, in, on, along, over or under the public roads or alleys of the city which are a part of the city road system without first obtaining a permit therefor and paying franchise fees hereafter provided; provided, however, that such franchise fees shall not be in excess of those as may be authorized by any federal regulatory agency where applicable. 
(b)	There is assessed a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, for the use of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers and public rights-of-way. 
(c)	For each sign and each receptacle on the public right-of-way, excepting those used in connection with the collection and delivery of the United States mail, there is assessed a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-6, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-5. Defacing streets, sidewalks or curbs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to mark or otherwise deface any public sidewalk, street, or curb in the city by painting any numbers, symbols, or advertising thereon, regardless of the purpose. This section does not apply to public utilities and their agents, Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, and other governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-7, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-6. Granite curb.
(a)	In addition to any permit requirements, no person shall remove, damage, haul away or cause misalignment of any granite curbing on public streets, including radius curb and catch basin stones, for any reason whatsoever without first receiving written permission from the city. Granite curbing on public streets is city property. 
(b)	Any removal or replacement of granite curbing on public streets must be done in accordance with section 14-670 and the specifications for granite curbing from the public works director. Granite curbs shall be removed by means to keep granite slabs intact and in a condition for re-use. Any granite curb that is removed shall be delivered to the public works department, unless otherwise authorized by the city. 
(c)	Upon conviction in municipal court, any person who violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be fined up to $500.00 per linear foot. Each linear foot shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-03, § 1(23-8), 1-13-2015)
Sec. 23-7. Mailboxes.
(a)	All mailboxes, whether installed on public or private streets, shall comply with the United States Postal Service (USPS) standards for the construction of mailboxes. A statement indicating the type of mail delivery available by the United States Postal Service (e.g., delivery to an individual mailbox or central delivery via cluster mailbox stations) shall be indicated on an approved subdivision plat or development permit. 
(b)	The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the mailboxes. 
(c)	Lateral placement of a non-cluster, individual mailbox shall be no more than six inches from the face of the curb or edge of pavement if no curb and gutter is present as defined by USPS installation requirements. In no case shall the face of the mailbox extend out over the face of the curb or edge of pavement if no curb and gutter is present. 
(d)	All monument-type or brick, stone, or masonry veneered mailboxes must be constructed with a hollow core. Concrete block construction is prohibited. 
(e)	Should the United States Postal Service determine that cluster mailboxes are required, said mailboxes shall be subject to the standards found in chapter 14, article VII (subdivisions), division 3 (design standards), subdivision VIII (cluster mailboxes). 
(Ord. No. 2015-05-01(B), § 1(23-9), 5-26-2015)
Secs. 23-8—23-31. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SPECIAL STREET LIGHT ASSESSMENT AND STREET LIGHTING STANDARDS
Sec. 23-32. Street light district.
(a)	Authority. The governing authority of the City of Brookhaven is granted supplementary powers pursuant to Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ 3(a)(4) to provide street light services within corporate limits. Further, the city is granted powers with respect to its municipal street system to provide lighting on any public road located within its corporate limits. O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92(a)(9). Further, Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ VI permits the city to create a special assessment for the provision of local government services within such district and allows a fee to be collected within such district to pay, wholly or partially, the cost of providing such services therein. Such special assessment may be created and fees collected by municipal ordinance. 
(b)	Purpose. The City of Brookhaven hereby declares and acknowledges that it shall promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by providing for street lights in public rights-of-way. The governing authority of the city finds that it is in the best interest of the citizens of Brookhaven and to those visiting the City of Brookhaven that the city provide a street light system that is functional, operational, aesthetically pleasing, and uniform throughout the city. The maintenance of street lights in the public rights of way provides illumination for vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the city to navigate and travel to and from their respective destinations along and across the public rights of way during non-daylight hours. Further, street lights provide illumination for citizens to access and frequent commercial and residential establishments within the city during non-daylight hours. The city finds and declares that the cost to provide street lights within the city rights-of-way should be borne by all property owners who receive the public benefit of street lights citywide. 
(c)	Creation. The city hereby creates a special street light assessment district pursuant to Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ VI and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92(a)(9). The boundaries of such special street light district shall be the same as the corporate limits of the City of Brookhaven as they currently exist on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(d)	Annexation and de-annexation. Upon the annexation of any territory into the city following the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, the boundaries of the street light service district shall extend to include the territory so annexed and all territory so annexed shall thereafter be subject to the terms of this chapter. Upon the de-annexation of any territory out of the city, the boundaries of the street light services shall be reduced to exclude the territory so de-annexed and all territory so de-annexed shall thereafter not be subject to the terms of this chapter. 
(e)	Cost. The city hereby declares that the cost for the creation and maintenance of the street light assessment shall be a service, as authorized by Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ VI, and not a tax. 
(f)	Special assessment. Each owner of each parcel of land contained in the street light district, unless exempted herein, is required to pay a special assessment as such fee is determined from time to time by the mayor and city council. A "parcel of land" or "parcel" for purposes of this chapter means any plot, lot, or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records that has its own individually assigned tax parcel number. 
(g)	Calculation of special assessment. An annual review of the costs associated with providing street light services will be completed to determine the calculation of the fee and approved by the mayor and city council in a public meeting. 
(1)	All parcels will be charged a flat assessment on the annual tax bill in an amount determined by the city. 
(2)	When determining or adjusting the special assessment, the city shall consider the costs of installation, operation, maintenance, and repair of street lights and collection of fees (including administrative costs) and any other costs that the city deems relevant in its sole discretion. 
(h)	Exemptions. The following parcels are exempt from having to pay the street light special assessment: parcels that comprise common areas owned by homeowner and property owner associations. 
(i)	Collections. The city shall collect the street light special assessment on all non-exempt parcels through the city's annual property tax billing statement. 
(1)	The street light service account shall be in the name of the parcel owner, even if the structure located on the parcel is leased to a tenant. The parcel owner shall be responsible for the assessment fee. 
(2)	The special assessment shall be paid by the due date and a one percent late charge shall be assessed against the owner for the unpaid balance. 
(Ord. No. 2024-11-04, § 2, 11-19-2024)
Sec. 23-33. Adoption.
(a)	To ensure adequate illumination of the public rights-of-way for the promotion of safety and security for the users of these rights-of-way and adjacent properties, the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, 1981 edition, as approved by the American National Standards Institute, is adopted as the standard (except as noted in subsection (b) of this section) for the installation and operation of public right-of-way lighting in the city. Permanent copies of the standard are on file with the city clerk and the department of public works. 
(b)	Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be: 


The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be not less than one-sixth of the average. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-3, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-34. Compliance.
(a)	Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the public works department for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. Should the department disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any right-of-way, the same shall be communicated in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the department may be appealed to the city council. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the department, a notice of appeal shall be filed with the department within 30 days from the date following the written notice of disapproval, and it shall be the responsibility of the department to transmit forthwith to the city council all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken and to ensure that the appeal is promptly placed upon the agenda of the council for its determination. The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. 
(b)	Roadway or street lighting luminaires or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as security lights, or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets, shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from the street and shall be oriented in such a manner to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street, and that the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the city shall be obtained before installation of these lights. 
(c)	Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-4, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 23-35—23-56. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 23-57. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Excavation means the removal of earth, rock or other soil materials for the purpose of installing utility facilities, non-single-family residential building foundations, or other similar uses. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-26, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-58. Applicability.
This article applies to all excavations made for the purposes of land development, utility installations, building construction or similar activity within the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-27, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-59. Federal regulations—Adopted.
Any person making an excavation shall meet the requirements as set forth in the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Regulations for Construction, as adopted April 17, 1971, and each amendment thereafter, with the exceptions and amendments included in this article. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-28, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-60. Same—Amendments and exceptions.
The following amendments and exceptions shall apply to the development requirements adopted by section 23-59: 
(1)	Excavations involved in the construction of a basement or foundation for a single-family residential structure are exempt from all of these requirements, with the exception that any excavation or foundation grading on which construction does not proceed within 30 days shall be fenced, so as to prevent general public entrance to the building site, or filled in. However, an extension may be allowed if justified and if approved by application to the city. 
(2)	The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility of the department having applicable jurisdiction over the type of work involved. 
(3)	In table P-2, the line reading "ten to 15 feet, likely to crack" and the column "Maximum Spacing, Vertical Feet," shall contain the number "4." 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-29, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 23-61—23-78. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. MOVING BUILDINGS AND OTHER OVERSIZE LOADS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 23-79. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish uniform permitting regulations and procedures for the moving of houses and other oversize loads on city roads, streets and bridges within the city, thereby protecting private property and lives against loss and damage, protecting the public investment in rights-of-way, roadbeds, traffic signs and signalizations and other structures, controlling and regulating the flow of traffic and ensuring the safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-46, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-80. Variances.
The public works department shall be authorized to grant a variance from the requirements of this article, but only where, by reason of the exceptional historical, architectural or social uniqueness or significance of the structure, the strict application of the provisions of this article would work an undue hardship upon the owner of the structure, and provided that the grant of any variance shall not substantially impair the intent and purpose of this article and further provided that the provisions of this article shall be complied with to the maximum extent possible. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-47, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 23-81—23-103. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
Sec. 23-104. Required.
No person shall move a house or other oversize load on any city road, street or bridge within the city without a permit to do so issued by the public works department. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-61, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-105. Application.
(a)	All persons desiring to obtain a permit under the provisions of this article shall make application on the form prescribed by the city. 
(b)	The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Name, address and phone number of the mover/applicant. 
(2)	Name, address and phone number of the owner of the structure. 
(3)	Address of the present location of the structure. 
(4)	Destination of the structure. 
(5)	Name and address of insurance company. 
(6)	Total height, outside width and length of vehicle and load. 
(7)	Certification that the person making application on behalf of the mover has lawful authority to execute such application and that all requirements under this section and sections 23-106 and 23-107 have been met. 
(8)	The proposed date and time of the move. 
(9)	A statement that the mover/applicant agrees to hold the city harmless from all claims or causes of action arising out of any damage to a public road or bridge, to persons, to public or private property caused by a permitted load or vehicle, or its private escort vehicle, and to recompense the city for any expenditures made by the city to repair such damages caused by the permitted vehicle or load. 
(c)	As a condition to the issuance of a permit, the city, when deemed necessary in the interest of public safety, may require the use of a front or rear escort, or both, either or both of which may be a public safety vehicle. 
(d)	All permit applications must be filed at least five days prior to the date of the proposed move and shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. If the application is not approved, the fee will be refunded to the applicant, less an administrative processing charge in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-62, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-106. Scope limited.
(a)	Except as authorized under section 23-80, a permit under this division shall not authorize the operation of a vehicle or load with: 
(1)	Total load length exceeding 75 feet; 
(2)	Total load width exceeding 14 feet, including mirrors and accessories attached thereto; or 
(3)	Total height exceeding 13 feet six inches. 
(b)	Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, no vehicle or load shall be operated over any bridge with a posted limit which is less than the total gross weight of the vehicle and its load or less than the total gross weight permitted under this article. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-63, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-107. Conditions to issuance.
In addition to compliance with other conditions imposed under the provisions of this division, any person receiving a permit under this division thereby certifies that such person will comply or has complied (as applicable herein) with the following conditions governing the operation of the permitted vehicle or load: 
(1)	Federal and state laws and regulations. 
(2)	The movement of the permitted vehicle or load will take place only on Monday through Thursday, and between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. 
(3)	The permitted load or vehicle will not be operated over any city road other than those described or allowed in the permit. 
(4)	The operator of a permitted vehicle and load shall maintain 50-foot intervals between each vehicle load. In addition, when the normal flow of traffic becomes impeded, such vehicle or load shall move off the traveled portion of the public road until such traffic congestion has been cleared. Normal movement may then be resumed until another traffic congestion occurs. 
(5)	The permittee shall maintain, during the existence of the permit, public liability and property damage insurance in at least the following amounts: public liability, $300,000.00 each accident; $100,000.00 each person injured; total property damage, $50,000.00; provided that nothing herein shall prevent the city from requiring any additional undertaking or security as may be deemed necessary to compensate the city for any injury to any public property therein, including a bridge. Proof of such liability insurance and other security shall accompany the permit application. 
(6)	The permittee shall ensure that the operator of a leased vehicle carries on such operator's person written proof of the identity of the lessee. 
(7)	The permittee shall not allow the permit to be used other than for the movement by the particular vehicle for which the permit was issued. 
(8)	The minimum equipment which shall be used for moving a house is: a tandem truck, one set of tandem dollies in good condition, and one extra skidder or wrecker in good condition and capable of moving the whole load in case of a breakdown. 
(9)	The permittee shall measure the house and, prior to applying for a permit, check the route stated in the permit application to ensure obstacle clearance and necessary places periodically to pull off the road for the purpose of preventing unnecessary traffic congestion. 
(10)	Before moving a house, all masonry shall be removed from a masonry-veneered house. 
(11)	All mailboxes, highway signs and other movable obstacles to the move of the house shall be removed as the house approaches such an obstacle and reerected immediately after the house passes such obstacle in equal or better condition than prior to removal. 
(12)	The movement shall be confined to the route stated in the application, and in no case shall exceed any straight line distance of 50 miles. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-64, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-108. Route approval.
Prior to the issuance of a moving permit under this division, the transport route proposed by the mover/applicant must be reviewed and approved by the public works department and police department. Unless no other reasonable alternative route exists, only those sections of city roads designated as truck routes by the city shall be used for the moving of such structures. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-65, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-109. Revocation, suspension or denial.
(a)	The public works department shall be authorized to deny, suspend or revoke a permit under this division requested by an applicant or issued to a permittee. Permits may be denied, suspended or revoked for cause including, but not limited to, any of the following reasons: 
(1)	Failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(2)	Repeated past violations by the applicant or permittee, of a relatively minor nature. 
(3)	A single, but aggravated violation. 
(4)	A material misrepresentation made by the applicant for a permit. 
(5)	Any other facts indicating that the applicant or permittee is a poor risk with regard to the safety of the traveling public and/or damage to public property. 
(b)	The city shall provide the applicant or permittee written notice of the decision to deny, revoke or suspend the application or permit. Such notice shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall include notice of the right to appeal under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-66, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-110. Appeals.
An applicant or permittee under this division shall be entitled to appeal a decision of the public works department denying, suspending or revoking a permit, to the hearing officer, by filing a notice of appeal with the public works department within ten days of the decision appealed from. The hearing officer shall schedule a hearing on the appeal to be held within 30 days of the date the appeal is filed and shall provide the appellant notice of the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-67, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 23-111—23-133. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
Sec. 23-134. Purpose; scope; exemption.
(a)	The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)	Establish a uniform permitting and inspection process, and reasonable regulations for the installation, construction, maintenance, renewal, removal, and relocation of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances of any utility in, on, along, over, or under the public roads, rights-of-way, and permanent easements of the city, which are a part of the city road system lying within the city, hereinafter collectively referred to as "the city's public roads"; 
(2)	Establish a uniform permitting and inspection process, and reasonable regulations for encroachment permits for the construction, relocation, or removal of driveways, sidewalks, curbing, bike lanes, multi-use trails, associated drainage facilities, and landscaping construction, and maintenance in, on, along, over, or under the city's public roads; 
(3)	Efficiently manage use of the city's public roads and maintain and preserve the physical integrity and layout of its public roads; 
(4)	Ensure that work is planned and performed in a manner that does not cause damage and does not create hazardous conditions in, on, along, over, or under the city's public roads; 
(5)	Inspect and monitor work to ensure that appropriate signage, barricades, and lighting are utilized to protect the public when work is in progress; 
(6)	Inspect and monitor work so that it is performed in a safe manner that reduces the risk of injury to persons using the city's public roads; 
(7)	Inspect and monitor work to reduce damage to private property, including but not limited to cars, motorcycles, and bicycles, traveling on the city's public roads; 
(8)	Inspect and monitor work to reduce damage to water and sewer lines, sidewalks, rights-of-way, or road surfaces; 
(9)	Regulate the time and location of excavation and other work to preserve effective traffic flow and prevent hazardous road conditions; and 
(10)	Recover a share of the cost of processing permits, inspecting and monitoring permitted work, and the cost of increased street repair and paving resulting from repeated excavation. 
(b)	All city departments and any infrastructure for city-owned facilities are exempt from compliance with the terms of this article. 
(c)	If there is a conflict between the provisions and requirements in this article, and federal law, state law, and/or any applicable state regulations adopted by the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT), as they exist now or may be amended hereafter, then federal law, state law, and/or the GDOT regulations shall govern. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-86, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-135. Permit.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to perform the work listed in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section without the prior issuance of an encroachment permit by the director of public works: 
(1)	Installation, construction, maintenance, renewal, removal, and relocation of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances of any utility in, on, along, over, or under the city's public roads. 
(2)	Construction, relocation, or removal of driveways, sidewalks, curbing, bike lanes, multi-use trails, associated drainage facilities, and landscaping construction and maintenance in, on, along, over, or under the city's public roads. 
(b)	The public works department shall develop application forms; establish, in writing, the documentation and information required for an encroachment permit application to be considered complete; develop objective, written criteria for granting, denying or revoking encroachment permits; develop guidelines listing the information required to be submitted on or with plans and specifications; promulgate all guidelines and necessary forms; and take such other administrative steps as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(c)	All information and plans required to be submitted by applicant and the objective, written criteria for evaluating permits shall relate solely to managing the use of the city's public roads, and shall be designed solely to obtain information that furthers the stated purposes of this article as reflected in section 23-134. 
(d)	The application for an encroachment permit may require the applicant to describe the nature, extent, and location of the work, and may also require the applicant to furnish an indemnity bond or other acceptable security conditioned to pay for any damages to any part of the city's public roads or to any member of the public caused by work performed under authority of such permit. 
(e)	Each applicant shall pay a nonrefundable encroachment permit application fee in an amount established by official action of the governing authority. In addition to the nonrefundable application fee, the applicant is required to pay cost recoupment fees in an amount established by official action of the city council. 
(f)	The director of public works shall determine if the proposed work can be performed under one permit or will require multiple permits. At a minimum, each applicant shall be required to obtain a separate encroachment permit for work that will be performed on more than one street. 
(g)	An applicant must pay the fees and submit a complete application to the director of public works. The director shall grant or deny an encroachment permit 30 days from receipt of a complete application. Each encroachment permit expires six months from the date of issuance by the city as reflected on the permit. 
(h)	Any encroachment permit may be denied or revoked by the director of public works for a violation of this article or a failure to show compliance with the city's objective, written criteria or guidelines established pursuant to this article. The decision to deny or revoke an encroachment permit shall become effective 14 days after the date the written notice is mailed to the applicant at the address on the encroachment permit application. The applicant/permittee may contest the denial or revocation by sending written reasons to the hearing officer explaining why an encroachment permit should not be denied or revoked prior to the effective date of denial or revocation. The hearing officer shall consider the written reasons and advise the applicant/permittee of his decision in writing within five business days of receipt. The hearing officer's decision in this regard is final. If the applicant/permittee contests the decision to deny or revoke an encroachment permit, the effective date of such denial or revocation shall be three days after the date of the hearing officer's final decision. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-87, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-136. Plans, specifications and responsibility.
(a)	Plans and specifications for all work to be covered by an encroachment permit shall be submitted to the public works director, and shall show in detail all required pertinent data and features of construction. 
(b)	Ground-mounted facilities shall be of a design compatible with abutting property. 
(c)	All work covered by an encroachment permit shall meet and comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, requirements and permits, including but not limited to this Code, the GDOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, the GDOT Policy for Accommodation of Utilities, the National Electrical Safety Code, the American National Standards Institute Standard Code for Pressure Piping, the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Manual, and the Georgia Sedimentation and Erosion Control Act. 
(d)	Permittees shall be solely and fully responsible for any claims, actions, damages or injury related in any way to the design and construction of permitted work. 
(e)	Permittees shall be solely responsible for providing adequate safety measures during all phases of permitted work. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-88, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-137. Failure to obtain permit.
Any person who performs the work listed in section 23-135(a)(1) and (2) without obtaining an encroachment permit shall be fined up to $500.00, upon conviction in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-03, § 2(23-89), 1-13-2015)
Secs. 23-138—23-157. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. SIDEWALK DISTRICTS
Sec. 23-158. Program established.
There is established a residential sidewalk district program whereby eligible residential areas may petition the city to install sidewalks within their neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-90, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-159. Sidewalk district requirements.
(a)	A sidewalk district can only be established in residentially zoned districts where the streets or roads within the proposed sidewalk district have been accepted by the city for perpetual maintenance. 
(b)	Sidewalk construction must begin and end at existing sidewalks or public road intersections, or immediately across from public road intersections, but may extend past a public road intersection to complete the frontage adjoining the proposed sidewalk construction. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-91, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-160. Application and petition.
(a)	Application. Anyone who desires to have a sidewalk district created shall submit an application to the director of public works or designee. Said application shall be made on forms made available by the public works department and shall at a minimum contain a plat showing the area of the proposed sidewalk district and the location of the proposed sidewalks. 
(b)	Estimate of costs.
(1)	Based upon the plat submitted with the application, the director of public works or designee shall prepare an estimate of the total project cost and pro rata cost per property owner for the creation of the proposed sidewalk district, including the costs for the design, contracting, acquisition of rights-of-way, and inspection for sidewalk construction funded by the sidewalk district. The director of public works' estimate may not establish a limit on the amount of the project costs and may not limit the amount that may be assessed against the property owners. 
(2)	If the application is incomplete or does not contain information sufficient for the director of public works to prepare the estimate, then the director of public works shall return the application to the applicant within 30 days of receipt indicating the additional information required. Otherwise, the director of public works shall prepare the estimate of costs and send the estimate to the applicant within 90 days of receipt of a complete application. 
(c)	Petition.
(1)	Circulation. The applicant shall be responsible for gaining the required signatures on a sidewalk district petition from property owners within the proposed sidewalk district. 
(2)	Contents. The petition shall contain the name, property address within the proposed sidewalk district, mailing address, and phone number of all property owners who sign the petition. If the property owner does not reside at the property within the sidewalk district, then the petition shall contain both the property address within the district and the property owner's actual address outside the district. 
(3)	Plat. The petition shall have attached to it a copy of the plat submitted to the director of public works showing the boundaries of the proposed sidewalk district and a copy of the director of public works' estimate of the total project cost and the pro rata cost per property owner. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-92, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-161. Procedure.
(a)	Return of petition. The petition for creation of the proposed sidewalk district must be returned to the director of public works within 90 days after the director of public works notifies the applicant that the preparation of the estimate of costs and pro rata costs for the project is complete; however, the director of public works has the discretion, for good cause shown, to extend the time for the return of the petition an additional 30 days, for a total of 120 days, when a request for such extension is made by the applicant to the director of public works before the expiration of the original 90-day period. 
(b)	Signatures. No assessment shall be made against abutting property, unless the same is consented to in writing by the owners of 51 percent of the property abutting such improvements. Said consent shall be deemed to have been given if the requisite number of signatures of such abutting property owners is included in the petition requesting the proposed sidewalks and the creation of the assessment district. 
(c)	Notice. Upon the timely receipt of a petition containing the required number of signatures, the director of public works shall cause the matter to be placed upon the city council's public hearing agenda for a hearing on the creation of the proposed sidewalk district. The director of public works or designee shall cause a notice to be published in the city's legal organ or a newspaper of general circulation in which the sheriff's advertisements are published at least once ten days prior to the date of said hearing, which notice shall give a brief description of the subdivision in which the work is to be done, the nature of the improvements to be made and the beginning and terminus of the road or street upon which such improvements are to be made and such notice shall set forth the time and place of the hearing. 
(d)	Notification of decision. Within 60 days of a final decision on the petition by the city council, the director of public works or designee shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, each affected property owner of the decision of the city council. If the final decision is an approval of the petition, then the public works director shall notify each affected property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a good faith estimate of the individual assessment. A final decision means the approval or denial of the petition by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-93, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 23-162. Funding.
(a)	Assessment. Each owner of property abutting the sidewalks shall be assessed a share of the cost to be funded by the district, which cost shall be added to the ad valorem property taxes for each owner as provided in this section. No assessment shall be made against abutting property, unless the same is consented to in writing by the owners of 51 percent of the property abutting such improvements. Abutting shall mean adjacent to, contiguous with, or adjoining. 
(b)	Pro rata costs. Each property owner's share of the cost shall be determined as follows: The total cost of the project shall be calculated by the city, and the figure so derived shall be known as the total project cost. The city shall next determine the linear feet of sidewalk that was constructed. The total cost shall then be divided by the total linear feet of sidewalk to derive the cost per foot. Each property owner abutting the sidewalks shall then be assessed an amount that equals the linear feet of street frontage the property owner has multiplied by the cost per foot. 
(c)	Payment. The sidewalk tax assessment shall be paid by one of two options, as follows: 
(1)	Option 1. The assessment may be paid in cash by the property owner within 90 days of the mailing of the assessment by the city. If paid under this option, the assessment will not bear an administrative fee and no lien shall be recorded against the property. Payment shall be made to city and delivered to the public works department. If payment is not made in full within 90 days of the city's initial billing of the assessment, then payment option two shall automatically take effect. Once option two is in effect, the payment via option two shall be the property owner's sole option until all assessment payments are satisfied. 
(2)	Option 2. The assessment shall be paid in five equal annual installments. Payment of each such assessment shall be due and payable within 60 days from the mailing by regular mail of a bill from the tax commissioner. In the event option two is selected, the cost of processing, administration, recording the lien, and satisfaction of such lien shall be added to the assessment. 
(d)	Notification to purchaser. The property owner shall advise any purchaser of its property within the sidewalk district of the assessment. The property owner may conduct a proration of the assessment with the purchaser. The city shall not be responsible for the proration of the assessments between sellers and purchasers nor shall the city be under any duty to notify any purchaser of the existence or liability for the assessment. 
(e)	Collection when not paid. If the assessment is not paid when due, the assessment shall be collected in the same manner as delinquent ad valorem taxes and shall be subject to the same interest and penalties. 
(f)	Lien. The assessment shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recorded by the tax commissioner in the lien records of the clerk of the county superior court. 
(g)	Processing fee. The fee for processing and administration of this option shall be established by the public works department and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-60, § 23-94, 1-22-2013)
ARTICLE VII. SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY MODEL
Sec. 23-163. Purpose and scope.
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for the placement of small wireless facilities in rights-of-way under the city's jurisdiction, consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city rights-of-way and the city as a whole. 
(b)	Intent. In enacting this chapter, the city is establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by small wireless facilities, including without limitation, to: 
(1)	Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)	Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)	Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of facilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property; 
(4)	Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees; 
(5)	Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such facilities are installed; 
(6)	Facilitate rapid deployment of small cell facilities to provide the benefits of advanced wireless services; 
(7)	Comply with the FCC order adopted in September 2018 related to small cell wireless equipment deployment, so long as such order is of force and effect; and 
(8)	Comply with Georgia law as passed by the Georgia General Assembly (SB 66). 
(c)	Preferred installation sites. It shall be the policy of the city to discourage the installation of new poles and above-ground cabinets in the city, and to encourage installations on locations in the following order of preference, consistent with all other applicable law, including but not limited to this chapter: 
(1)	Co-located with existing small wireless facilities on or off the rights-of-way; 
(2)	On existing poles located within the rights-of-way; or 
(3)	On replacement poles installed in the rights-of-way. 
(d)	Conflicts with other chapters. In the event of a conflict between this article and any other provision of the Brookhaven Code of Ordinances, this article shall control as applied to small cell wireless facilities, only. Otherwise, this article shall supplement and be read in conjunction with the terms of any other ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-164. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases and their derivations, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not otherwise defined herein or in any agreement that might be granted hereunder shall be given the meaning set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66C-2 and if not defined therein, the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC 151 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as those statutes may hereinafter be amended (collectively the "Communications Act"), and, if not defined therein, the common and ordinary meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Applicable laws means all applicable local, state, and federal law, including but not limited to building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by the city, the Streamlining Wireless Facilities and Antennas Act Senate Bill 66, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as codified in 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq. 
City owned pole means (i) a utility pole owned or operated by the City in the rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, a utility pole that provides lighting or traffic control functions, including light poles, traffic signals, and structures for signage, and (ii) a pole or similar structure owned or operated by the city in the ROW that supports only wireless facilities. 
City-approved pole is a pole design which has been submitted by applicant, evaluated and pre-approved by city staff for use within the right-of-way by the applicant. A list of each applicant's pre-approved poles and a set of specifications for newly proposed poles will be maintained by the public works department for both rights-of-way in special districts and general use areas. In order to protect applicant's intellectual property, applicants may submit poles and specifications for pre-approval for their use only. 
Concealment element means any design feature, including but not limited to painting, landscaping, shielding requirements, and restrictions on location, proportions, or physical dimensions in relation to the surrounding area or the structure which supports a small wireless facility, that are intended to make a small wireless facility or any supporting structure less visible to the casual observer. 
Day means calendar day. 
Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including the city. 
Rights-of-way or ROW means the area on, below, or above a roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or similar property, but not including a federal interstate highway, in the city. 
Small small wireless facility means a small wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) all antennas shall either be enclosed in a canister with a maximum total volume of six cubic feet, and (ii) all other wireless equipment shall, to the extent feasible, be contained within the pole or support structure, but if mounted externally, shall not exceed a maximum volume of 28 cubic feet, and must be attached to the pole unless the applicant identifies a ground mounted concealment structure in the application. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
Small wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated. 
Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part for the purpose of carrying electric distribution lines or cables or wires for telecommunications, cable or electric service, or for lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function regardless of ownership, including city-owned poles. Such term shall not include structures supporting only wireless facilities. 
Wireless infrastructure provider means any person, including a person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state, that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities or wireless support structures, but that is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services provider means an entity that is authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to provide personal wireless services as defined at 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7). 
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or, other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Such term shall not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-165. Master right-of-way license agreement.
Any company, partnership, association, corporate entity or individual seeking to Install small cell communications equipment in the city's right-of-way may first enter into a "Master Right-of-way License Agreement" ("License Agreement") with the city in a form as approved by the mayor and city council and shall, in accordance with the provisions of such license agreement, conform and adhere to all procedures and permitting requirements enumerated therein for any proposed deployments, collocations, attachments or new installations. The city manager shall have the authority to execute such a license agreement on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-166. Meeting required with public works 30 days before submitting application.
(a)	The city is a class II authority located in a metropolitan statistical district. 
(b)	No later than 30 days before the filing of its first application under this article, an applicant shall meet with the public works director of the city and provide the following information: 
(1)	The time the applicant expects to begin deployment of small wireless facilities within the city. 
(2)	The number of small wireless facilities and poles expected to be deployed in the following 24 months. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-167. Permitted use; application and fees.
(a)	Permit applications must contain a demonstration that proposed facilities meet the following objective design guidelines: 
(1)	Intent and purpose. Small wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way and utility poles installed or repurposed in the public rights-of-way for deployment of small cell facilities shall be designed in such a manner to maximize compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood and to minimize any negative visual impact on the surrounding neighborhood. The objective design standards contained in this code section regulating the location context, color, stealth design, and concealment of the proposed small wireless facility shall apply, unless a waiver of the objective design standards contained herein is approved by the mayor and city council. 
(2)	Permittees shall not place or maintain signage on communications facilities, including small cell facilities or utility poles for deployment of small cell facilities, in public rights-of-way, unless otherwise required by federal or state law, provided; however, existing structures that lawfully supported signage before being repurposed may continue to support signage as otherwise permitted by law. 
(3)	A small wireless facility shall not have any type of lighted signal, lights, or illuminations unless required by applicable codes, local codes or regulations, a permit issued by the city, or state and federal laws and regulations or as permitted by the city. 
(4)	Design and stealth design standards for new utility poles or replaced utility poles for deployment of small cell facilities. All proposed new or replaced utility poles for deployment of small cell facilities shall meet the design standards contained in this code section, or the license agreement and permit, unless waived by the mayor and city council. 
a.	A replaced or restructured utility pole to accommodate the deployment of a small wireless facility shall be in the same location as the original utility pole. 
b.	The replaced or restructured utility pole shall be substantially similar in finish, base and pole design, diameter, material and height as the original pole being replaced, unless the city requires a different design, color or composition to be consistent with applicable city standards for new utility poles. 
c.	The height for a new pole, modified pole or replacement pole installed in a historic district and in an area zoned primarily for residential use shall not exceed 50 feet above ground level; each new, modified or replacement pole installed in the right-of-way not in a historic district or area zoned primarily for residential use shall not exceed the greater of (i) 50 feet above ground level; or (ii) ten feet greater in height above ground level than the tallest existing pole in the same city right-of-way in place as of January 1, 2019 and located within 500 feet of the new proposed pole. 
d.	New utility poles shall be designed to be substantially similar in design to other utility poles in the same block or vicinity of the public rights-of-way. Such design aspects to follow include the material, base, pole diameter and style, location and style of attachments, finish, and cap, as applicable. By way of example, if existing utility poles in the same area of the public rights-of-way are light poles, the new utility pole should be designed substantially similar to such light poles and to the extent consistent with location context regulations, equidistant between existing poles. To the extent not inconsistent with applicable law, any such stealth utility pole for deployment of a small wireless facility shall function in the same manner as the facility it is intended to resemble in compliance with the city Code, at the expense of the permittee. By way of example, if a permittee installs a utility pole for deployment of a small wireless facility to resemble a nearby light pole, the facility should include a light that is operated in the same manner as other light poles, at the applicant's expense unless and until ownership of such pole is transferred to the city. 
e.	Notwithstanding this subsection, if the proposed location of a new utility pole for deployment of a small wireless facility is within a public right-of-way that is within a particular special district, zoning district, community development district, community redevelopment agency, character area, overlay district, historic district or property, or a homeowners' association that has design standards applicable to utility poles, such proposed utility pole shall substantially comply with such design standards. 
(5)	This subsection does not authorize the installation of a new utility pole for deployment of a small wireless facility in a location that is otherwise prohibited pursuant to court order or applicable codes. 
(6)	Attachment authorization. Any small cell facilities that require installing, collocating, modifying or replacing wireless attachments and ancillary equipment to a pole or support structure, or otherwise attaching or using a third party's pole shall require, in addition to obtaining a permit, the applicant to submit evidence that the applicant has authorization allowing the placement of the small wireless facility on the pole or other support structure. 
(7)	Small wireless facilities and wireless attachments shall be operated and maintained in a manner that does not interfere with public safety, utility or public works equipment. 
(b)	Stealth design for deployment of small cell facilities.
(1)	Wires, cables and equipment to be deployed on a utility pole shall be within the utility pole or if not possible to being installed within the utility pole, covered with a shroud. No exposed wires or cables are permitted. 
(2)	If the utility pole for the proposed deployment of a small wireless facility is a light pole, a street light fixture substantially similar in design to the existing street light fixture shall, to the extent technically feasible, be used to camouflage the small wireless facility such as through replacement of the cobra head with a new cobra head containing the small wireless facility, or a side-mounted light may be replaced with a substantially similarly designed side mounted light containing the small wireless facility. Unless consistent with the design of the utility pole, a small wireless facility shall not be deployed on a mast of a utility pole. Any street light fixture installed by the permittee shall be maintained in good working order by the permittee at its cost unless and until ownership of such pole is transferred to the city. 
(3)	Maximum height restrictions. A small wireless facility, including any attached antennas, shall not exceed ten feet above the existing structure, repurposed structure or utility pole upon which the small wireless facility is to be deployed or 50 feet whichever is higher. 
(c)	Wireless equipment not deployed on utility poles or existing structures.
(1)	Ground-mounted wireless facilities up to 28 cubic feet in dimension shall be located within a ten foot radius of the existing structure or utility pole for the collocated small wireless facility. 
(2)	The ground-mounted wireless facilities shall be architecturally designed consistent with the city's design style. Ground-mounted small cell facilities up to 28 cubic feet shall have a non-reflective finish of a neutral color consistent with the predominant background color of the attachment or the surrounding landscape and placed on a concrete base surrounded by appropriate landscaping for the area. Alternatively, the permittee may propose a small wireless facility that would be substantially similar in terms of material, design and color finish to other at-grade city-owned infrastructure within 500 feet of the proposed location in the public rights-of-way such as waste receptacles or city rights-of-way infrastructure. 
(3)	To the extent consistent with applicable codes, at the city's direction the permittee owner of a ground-mounted small wireless facility in the public rights-of-way shall conceal the facility with landscaping and plantings consistent with other landscaping in the area. In areas with landscaped swales, the small wireless facility must be within the swale and concealed with consistent landscaping. Landscaping and plantings pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to the city's approval and be maintained by the permittee at its sole cost and expense consistent with the city Code for so long as the small wireless facility remains in the public rights-of-way. 
(d)	Routine maintenance and replacement. An application shall not be required for: (i) routine maintenance; and (ii) the replacement of a small small wireless facility with another small small wireless facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, and height. 
(e)	Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted in writing to the city no more than 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. Should an application require updating pursuant to this section, any applicable shot clock shall be deemed tolled the number of days between the change necessitating the amendment, and notice under this subsection being transmitted to the city. 
(f)	[Fees]. Application fees due under this chapter shall be payable upon submission of the application, and any failure to fully pay application fees at the time of application submission shall absolve the city from any requirement to process the application until those fees are paid, to the extent permissible by law. 
(g)	[Payments]. Any payments due under this chapter shall first be paid within 30 days of the completion of permitted construction. Initial annual payments for new facilities shall be prorated based on the number of whole or partial months remaining in the calendar year, counted from the date construction is complete. Subsequent annual payments shall be due the first business day of each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-168. Action on permit applications.
(a)	As a condition to the issuance of a permit to deploy a small wireless facility or to install, modify, or replace a pole or a decorative pole for deployment of a small wireless facility in a right-of-way, the applicant shall pay the following fees and rates: 
(1)	A fee for each application for the deployment of each small wireless facility on an existing pole assessed by the city $100.00 per small wireless facility; 
(2)	A fee for each application for each replacement pole with an associated small wireless facility assessed by the city of $250.00; or 
(3)	A fee for each application for each new pole with an associated small wireless facility assessed by the city $1,000.00 per pole with an associated small wireless facility. 
(b)	The monetary fees provided in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this code section shall increase two and one-half percent annually beginning January 1, 2021. 
(c)	If, in a final adjudication not subject to further appeal or to review by the United States Supreme Court, a federal court reviewing Accelerating Wireless Broadband Deployment by Removing Barriers to Infrastructure Investment, et al., Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order, WT Docket No. 17-79 and WC Docket No. 17-84, FCC 18-133 (released September 27, 2018), or a related FCC order, or a Georgia Federal District Court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit, or the United States Supreme Court interpreting 47 U.S.C. Section 253(c) as it existed on January 1, 2019, determines that fair and reasonable compensation includes not only cost based charges but also market based charges with respect to application fees or right-of-way occupancy rates for the installation of small wireless facilities or poles, or to city pole attachment rates for small wireless facilities, then: 
(1)	Beginning on July 1 of the calendar year following the date that the final adjudication is no longer subject to further appeal or to review by the United States Supreme Court, the monetary caps provided in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3). of this code section for the fees or rates to which the determination applies, excluding any increases that have been made under subsection (f)(2) of this code section, shall double; and 
(2)	Beginning on July 1 of the second calendar year following the date that the final adjudication is no longer subject to further appeal or to review by the United States Supreme Court, the city will revise and amend the fees due under this section as allowed by law. 
(d)	Within 20 days of the receipt of an application, the city manager or their designee shall: 
(1)	Notify the applicant of any work in the right-of-way that is scheduled or anticipated to be performed within 24 months of the date the application is submitted to the city. 
(2)	Notify the applicant of any deficiencies or other aspects of the application that appear to be grounds for denial of the application, and 
(3)	Determine whether the application is complete and inform the applicant of the city's determination in writing. If the city manager or their designee determines the application is incomplete, they shall notify the applicant in writing of all deficiencies. The applicant shall have 20 days from the date of the notice from the city to respond and amend any deficiencies found in the application. Upon receipt of the amended application, if the city manager or their designee determines that the application remains incomplete or if there have been material changes to the application, the city shall notify the applicant of those remaining deficiencies or changes within ten days of the city's receipt of the amended application, which notice shall stand as a denial of the application. 
(e)	The city manager or their designee shall make a final decision to approve or deny a complete application for a colocation of a small wireless facility within 30 days of the determination the application is complete. 
(f)	The city manager or their designee shall make a final decision to approve or deny a complete application for all other applications within 70 days of the determination the application is complete. 
(g)	Any decision to deny any application shall be in writing and shall establish all reasons for the denial of the application. 
(h)	Any notice or communication required under this section may performed by overnight delivery, email, United States, Mail, or any other form authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-66C-7(s). 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-169. Deployment of facilities.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, if the right-of-way location is adjacent to a property zoned for single family residential development, the maximum allowed volume of the small cell small wireless facility shall be the smallest commercially available enclosure possible, unless otherwise authorized by state or federal law. 
Sec. 23-170. Small wireless facilities in the ROW; maximum height; other requirements.
(a)	Maximum size of permitted use. Small wireless facilities, and new, modified, or replacement utility poles and wireless support structures for the collocation of small wireless facilities may be placed in the rights-of-way as a permitted use subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	Small wireless facilities installed on existing, modified, or replacement poles in the rights-of-way shall not exceed the greater of: 
a.	Ten feet above the existing utility pole or wireless support structure upon which the small cell small wireless facility is to be installed; or, 
b.	Fifty feet in height. 
(2)	Each new utility pole or wireless support structure in the rights-of-way shall not exceed 50 feet in height. 
(3)	Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to permit aggregation of multiple height increases, such as by seeking to install a new utility pole or wireless support structure, and then attempting to exceed what would have been the maximum permissible height for that new or replacement pole by requesting an increase to attach facilities. Height limits for existing utility poles or wireless support structures shall be assessed based on the height of the structure before the first small wireless facility is installed, and applicants shall not be permitted to request additional height increases based on the total height of a pole, including existing wireless facilities above the top of the utility pole or wireless support structure. 
(b)	Undergrounding provisions. Applicant shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements that prohibit electric utilities, telecommunications or cable providers from installing structures in the rights-of-way without prior zoning approval in areas zoned for single family residential use, provided such requirements shall not prohibit the replacement of existing structures with structures whose design the city expressly consents to. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-171. Effect of permit.
(a)	Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
(b)	Duration. No permit for construction issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than 12 months unless construction has actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-172. Removal, relocation or modification of small wireless facilities in the ROW.
(a)	Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, unless a longer period is provided for at the sole discretion of the city, a wireless provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any small wireless facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the city has determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-of-way. To the extent feasible, the city will reasonably cooperate with a wireless provider whose facilities must be removed or relocated to attempt to locate a mutually acceptable replacement location to house the small wireless facilities. This provision shall not be interpreted to constitute a commitment on the part of the city that such a location will be found or provided, or that the city is under an obligation to ensure such alternative locations are available. 
(b)	Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any small small wireless facility located within the rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate, or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall notify the wireless provider and provide the wireless provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to cutting or removing a facility and in any event shall notify the wireless provider as soon as is practicable but in no event more than 15 days after cutting or removing a small small wireless facility. 
(c)	Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a small small wireless facility within the rights-of-way of the city, the wireless provider shall notify the city within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the small small wireless facility if the city, or any of its departments, determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)	Removal and restoration. Any small small wireless facility removed from the rights-of-way shall be removed in accordance with all applicable health and safety requirements. The site upon which the facility was located shall be restored to the condition that existed prior to the installation of the facility, normal wear and tear excepted, or as required by the city planner. The holder of the original permit for the facility shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits and paying all costs associated with the removal of the facility and site restoration. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-173. Rates for access to rights-of-way.
(a)	Legislative findings. The city council makes the following additional findings: 
(1)	The right-of-way owned and maintained by the city is a limited and valuable resource and asset of the citizens and residents of the City; 
(2)	Small cell wireless providers use hard-wired connections between the receiver at the small cell small wireless facility and a distribution point for the larger wireless network; 
(3)	Georgia law authorizes municipalities to utilize the Georgia Department of Transportation tables and regulations for the cost per mile of use of right-of-way; 
(4)	Georgia law authorizes the city to obtain fair market value for the use of the city's right-of-way; 
(5)	The city finds that the fair market value of the use of right-of-way is $1,000.00 per node or small cell small wireless facility; and 
(6)	The city's actual costs for the use of the right-of-way, including limiting other and further use of the right-of-way, redevelopment costs, expansion of transportation needs (including sidewalks, multi-use paths, and other infrastructure) is $800.00 per node or small cell small wireless facility. 
(b)	Annual rate for existing, replacement or modified locations. As a condition to the continued authority to maintain a small wireless facility in a right-of-way, the applicant shall pay the following fees and rates: 
(1)	One hundred dollars per year for each small wireless facility deployed on any existing or replacement pole, including an existing or replacement City pole; or 
(2)	Two hundred dollars per year for each new pole, other than a replacement pole, with an associated small wireless facility. 
(c)	The monetary rates provided in subsections (a) through (b) of this code section shall increase two and one-half percent annually beginning January 1, 2021. 
(d)	If, in a final adjudication not subject to further appeal or to review by the United States Supreme Court, a federal court reviewing Accelerating Wireless Broadband Deployment by Removing Barriers to Infrastructure Investment, et al., Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order, WT Docket No. 17-79 and WC Docket No. 17-84, FCC 18-133 (released September 27, 2018), or a related FCC order, or a Georgia Federal District Court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit, or the United States Supreme Court interpreting 47 U.S.C. Section 253(c) as it existed on January 1, 2019, determines that fair and reasonable compensation includes not only cost based charges but also market based charges with respect to application fees or right-of-way occupancy rates for the installation of small wireless facilities or poles, or to City pole attachment rates for small wireless facilities, then: 
(1)	Beginning on July 1 of the calendar year following the date that the final adjudication is no longer subject to further appeal or to review by the United States Supreme Court, the monetary caps provided in subsections (b)(1)a. through (b)(1)e. of this code section for the fees or rates to which the determination applies, excluding any increases that have been made under subsection (b)(2) of this code section, shall double; and 
(2)	Beginning on July 1 of the second calendar year following the date that the final adjudication is no longer subject to further appeal or to review by the United States Supreme Court, the fees established in this code section for the fees or rates to which the determination applies shall terminate. In place of any monetary caps that terminate pursuant to this subsection, applicants shall pay fees or rates, as each may be applicable, that constitute the fair and reasonable compensation due to the authority under applicable law. 
(e)	Cease payment. A wireless provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from a pole in the rights-of-way and cease paying the annual rate to the city. A provider who exercises their rights under this section shall be entitled to return of fees paid in advance under this chapter, only for those full calendar months after the date at which the wireless provider's facilities had been removed fully and all repair and restoration work had been completed as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-174. Attachment to city-owned utility poles in the ROW.
(a)	Annual rate. The rate to place a small small wireless facility on a city-owned pole in the right-of-way shall be $40.00 per year per city-owned pole in the rights-of-way. 
(b)	Cease payment. A wireless provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from a city-owned pole in the rights-of-way and cease paying the annual rate to the city. A provider who exercises their rights under this section shall be entitled to return of fees paid in advance under this chapter, only for those full calendar months after the date at which the wireless provider's facilities had been removed fully and all repair and restoration work had been completed as required by law. 
(c)	Make-ready. For city-owned utility poles in the rights-of-way, the city shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested small small wireless facility, including pole replacement if necessary, within 60 days after receipt of a completed request. Make-ready work including any pole replacement shall be completed within 60 days of written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the wireless provider. All make-ready work required for a wireless provider to occupy a city-owned pole shall be conducted solely at the wireless provider's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-175. Development standards.
In addition to the requirements detailed elsewhere in this chapter, the following development standards shall apply to all small wireless facilities governed by this chapter: 
(1)	Any small small wireless facility attached to a pole hosting a street light, traffic light, or other public safety purpose shall only be permissible to the extent it does not interfere with the operation of any public safety function or public safety communications. If in the City's sole discretion it is determined that a particular pole or location cannot support a small small wireless facility without interfering with or otherwise affecting the reliability, performance, safety, or other functional aspects of such a pole, the city may deny a permit to install a small wireless facility on such a pole, or to construct a new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure, at such a location, to the extent permissible under law. 
(2)	All small wireless facilities shall incorporate concealment elements to the maximum extent technically and economically feasible and as appropriate to the site and type of facility. Specifically, all small wireless facilities shall employ and maintain camouflage design techniques to minimize visual impacts and provide appropriate screening. Such techniques shall be employed so that the installation, operation, and appearance of the small wireless facilities will be consistent with the character of the surrounding area or the structure to which the small small wireless facility is attached. 
(3)	Wireless providers may place new poles or wireless support structures in the rights-of-way, but only where there are existing above-ground utility poles and the poles must be removed if other such poles are removed, unless those poles would meet the requirements of this subsection as permissible new poles. Specifically and furthermore, a new pole is only permitted if the applicant can show that: 
a.	Existing utility poles or other support structures cannot be used to support the small wireless facilities, or would require a modification that would make the addition of an additional utility pole or wireless support structure less intrusive or safer; 
b.	The pole or support structure to be installed will be similar in size and design to existing poles, and placed appropriately to minimize intrusiveness and to avoid creating undue hazard to persons or property; and 
c.	The applicant demonstrates that the denial of the application would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7) as interpreted by precedent binding in the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals. 
(d)	Monopoles. Every new utility pole or wireless support structure shall be a monopole rather than a lattice tower or guy-wire support tower, unless otherwise authorized. 
(e)	Access. No facility shall be built so as to cause the right-of-way in which the facility is located to fail to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act or otherwise obstruct access. 
(f)	Security. All facilities shall be designed so as to be resistant to and minimize the opportunities for unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti, and other conditions, which would result in hazardous conditions, visual blight, or attractive nuisances. 
(g)	Screening. Any equipment that is not installed underground shall be screened by structures, topography, or vegetation to the maximum extent technically and economically feasible. Coaxial cables, conduit lines, and electrical boxes for ground-mounted wireless equipment shall be placed underground or within approved structures to the extent feasible. 
(h)	Public art, flagpoles, artificial natural features. Wireless providers shall be encouraged to design small wireless facilities to serve as public art, flagpoles, or artificial natural features such as trees or rocks where such designs are appropriate and technically and economically feasible. 
(i)	Colors and materials. Unless otherwise required by city, county, state, or federal rules or regulations, small wireless facilities shall have a non-reflective finish and shall be a neutral color consistent with the predominant background color. 
(j)	Lighting. Signal lights or illumination shall be prohibited unless required by the FCC or the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(k)	Signage. The facilities shall not bear any signage, other than certification, warning, information, safety, and directional signage, or other non-commercial signage required by law, or expressly permitted by the city. 
(l)	Power supply. Any facility occupying a city-owned pole is only permissible to the extent the existing function of the pole is not impeded. In particular, street lights and traffic lights' power supplies may not be used by applicants. When attaching to city-owned poles, applicants are responsible for securing separately metered power for their facilities, and are responsible for any and all costs incurred in modifying a pole to support additional power supplies. In all other cases, applicants are responsible for ensuring that their power supply arrangements with electric utilities do not result in any incremental cost increase to the city. 
(m)	In the event a replacement pole is required, the applicant shall notify the pole owner: (1) of the date of city's action approving the replacement pole and (2) that, pursuant to this section 23-175(m), the city requires the pole owner to remove the old pole within 90 days of the installation of the replacement pole. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-176. Waivers.
A request for a waiver of the design standards for a proposed small wireless facility that does not satisfy these design guidelines shall be submitted to the public works department for review and approval prior to the permittee submitting an application. The city manager or designee reserves the right to submit any application for a small wireless facility permit to the city council with notice to the applicant, to determine if such proposed facility is consistent with the city's objective design standards. The city shall approve or deny the request for a waiver in writing within 30 calendar days. If a decision is not received by the applicant on Day 30, the proposed design is deemed approved. After 30 calendar days, the applicant shall submit its application, which the city shall process in accordance with the timelines established by O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 66C. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-177. Variance and appeal process.
(a)	Any applicant desiring relief or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this article may request the community development department, in the case of volume of the deployment, or the public works department, in any other case, provided that the relief or exemption is contained in the original application, or in the case of an existing or previously approved application a request for alteration of its proposed facilities. In determining the variance requested, the department head shall consider the elements established in subsection (b) below. In the event applicant submits an application for a variance, or any appeal of a departmental decision, applicant shall agree to toll the shot clock or application processing deadlines found in federal, state, or local law for a reasonable amount of time for the city to act upon any such request.. 
(b)	In the event the applicant is not satisfied with the decision of the department head, the applicant may take an appeal to the city council, if such appeal is filed with the city clerk within 15 days of the final decision by the department head, which filing shall include all grounds to be asserted for the appeal. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete, at the sole discretion of the city council. In exercising its discretion, the council may consider the following factors: (1) the number of small cell wireless facilities on the same street, (2) the number of small cell wireless facilities within 100 feet of the proposed node, (3) the volume of the other small cell wireless facilities on the same street, (4) the character area of the street on which the new deployment is proposed, (5) the proposed (if any) camouflage efforts to conceal or blend the facility into the surrounding flora and landscape, (6) the need of the node or small cell wireless facilities in the precise location proposed, and (7) the proposed deployment does not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and residents of the city. However, the burden of proving the need for the requested relief or exemption is solely on the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the council by clear and convincing evidence. The applicant shall bear all costs of the city council in considering the request and the relief shall not be transferable to a new or different holder of the permit or owner of the facilities without the specific written permission of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Sec. 23-178. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on August 20, 2019. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, 7-23-2019)
Chapter 25 WATER, SEWER AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 25-1—25-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. WATER SYSTEM
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 25-19. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agreement means a contract for water service between the city and other public or private water systems, counties or municipalities. 
Approved means accepted in writing for planning, installation or activation by the director. 
Appurtenance means an item attached to or made part of a water main to divert or control flow, excluding taps and waterlines. 
As-built design means a graphical presentation of the characteristics and scope of work performed which has been prepared by the engineer and approved by the county. 
Authorized person means a regular and designated employee of the county or its legal agent. 
Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, gases or other substances into the distributing pipes of the potable water supply from any source or sources. 
Backflow prevention device means any effective device, method or construction approved by the county, used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of device used should be based on the degree of hazard, either existing or potential. 
Back-siphonage means a form of backflow due to a negative pressure within a potable water system. 
Back pressure means a form of backflow due to a negative pressure within a potable water system. 
Billing period means the time interval between issuance of statements for service. 
Commercial customer means a person receiving service at premises where such person engages in nonmanufacturing business operations, as licensed by the county. 
Commodity charge means a billing to a customer reflecting the volume of water delivered. 
Comprehensive plan means the currently adopted future land use plan for the city. 
Construction cost means the contractor's expense in constructing any additions or modifications to the water system. 
Contractor means a person with whom the county or a developer contracts for execution of work. 
Cross connection means any actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between the public potable water system or a consumer's potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can or may occur are considered to be cross connections. 
Customer means a person receiving water service from the county. 
Department means the public works department or such other water service provider as may hereafter be designated to enforce this article. 
Developer means a person engaged in building residential subdivisions, commercial or industrial complexes. 
Development means any action in preparation for construction activities which results in alteration of either land or vegetation. This definition shall not apply to individual single-family dwelling unit construction within a subdivision recorded subsequent to July 28, 1970, or to alteration, modification or additions to single-family dwelling units except for, in either case, individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots are located within the intermediate regional floodplain. 
Director means the public works director, or when a water service provider other than the public works department is designated to enforce provisions of this article, the director of such water service provider. 
Dwelling means a domicile intended for one or more families. 
Dwelling unit means that portion of a dwelling in which only one family resides. 
Engineer means a professional engineer practicing civil-sanitary engineering who is licensed by the state. 
Extension means an addition to the water system consisting of mains six inches or larger in diameter and all appurtenances required or accepted by the water service provider. 
Fire hydrant means a system appurtenance for connection and flow control to temporary fire lines. 
Fire line service means an unmetered or metered permanent connection to the system restricted to fire control use. 
Guarantee deposit means a sum of money specified by the county deposited by a prospective customer as guarantee that bills for service will be paid. 
Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination, or pollution of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system to such a degree of intensity that there would be a danger to health. 
Hearing means a public meeting called at the discretion of the city or water service provider with appropriate public notice to evaluate merits of a system extension or modification. 
Industrial customer means a person engaged in manufacture or processing of goods or materials, as licensed by the county. 
Inspection means an action by an authorized person who may enter a customer's premises to inspect the water system and any plumbing connected thereto for their compliance with county ordinances. 
Inspection fee means a charge to a customer, contractor, developer or other person for inspecting extensions or existing or new connections to the water system for their compliance with county ordinances. 
Meter means a manufactured unit which is part of the system, used to measure and totalize volume of water flowing from the system into a customer's piping system. 
Miscellaneous service means any noncontinuous service for which charges are set. 
Off-site mains means system water mains installed outside of private property or tracts planned for development. 
On-site mains means system water mains installed in easements or dedicated rights-of-way within private property or tracts planned for development. 
Oversized mains means water mains sized for capacity in excess of that required to meet the short-term needs that prompted extension. 
Planned extension means an extension of the water system by the water service provider done as a programmed fulfillment of a step in its long-range planning process. 
Plans means engineering drawings and specifications for extension of the system or for connections thereto, prepared by an engineer or by the water service provider. 
Plumber means a person licensed to render plumbing services. 
Plumbing means piping and associated fixtures on a premises that are connected in any way to the water system. 
Plumbing fee means that fee paid for the issuance of a plumbing permit. 
Potable water means water meeting the requirements of the latest United States Public Health Service set of regulations, drinking water standards, for use in control of water quality for interstate carriers. 
Premises means building, house, store, plant or any other place where people live, work or congregate. 
Private water system includes the water source, delivery piping and all appurtenances, excluding building plumbing, that serve more than one dwelling unit or a commercial or industrial premises as a potable water supply. 
Property owner means a person holding legal title to a premises or an authorized representative thereof. 
Sanitary sewer means a pipe which carries sanitary sewage and excludes groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters. 
Service means the acts and procedures of supplying water to system customers. 
Service charge means billing for recurring service that is provided, whether service is used or not. 
Service cock means the valve placed on the service connection which is used to turn on and turn off the flow of water from the water main to the premises. 
Service connection means the procedure of making service available to a customer, which includes the service line, water meter, service cock and the tap on initial installation; subsequent service connections will normally only require a water meter. 
Service connection charge means a charge made for the service connection including the tap fee when performed. 
Service line means the waterline from a tap to and including meter and service cock if they are required. 
Standard Methods refers to Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition, published by APHA, AWWA, WPCF. 
Sterilize or sterilization means the procedure of disinfecting water mains, service lines, plumbing and appurtenances by county-approved methods. 
Subdivision means any tract of land, divided, planned or developed as a subdevelopment with two or more residences, buildings or building sites. 
Surge means a sudden pressure change in the water system caused by rapid valve operation. 
Tap means the procedure and result of connecting a service line or water main to an existing or new water main. 
Tap fee means a charge made for making a tap on its water main. 
Unsanitary means unclean, unhealthy or harmful to the public health. 
Valve means a plumbing appurtenance used to control flow in a water main or service line. 
Water main or line means a pipeline in the water system. 
Water system or system means the interrelated network for purification and delivery of drinking water, including all water mains, service lines and appurtenances. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-26, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-20. Cross connection survey team.
The cross connection survey team shall work under the direction of the department, and shall have authority for implementation of the cross connection requirements of the water service provider. It shall have responsibility to see that backflow prevention devices are installed where required, tested for proper functioning upon completion of installation, and periodically tested for proper functioning after installation. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-27, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-21. Feasibility of providing service.
Water service and fire protection shall be provided in the order of application and only if determined to be feasible and consistent with sound system operation. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-28, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-22. Water quality standards; inspection; record of treatment operations.
The system shall supply potable water meeting current drinking water standards established by federal, state and local authorities. The system shall be open to inspection and tests by such authorities upon reasonable notice. The water service provider shall maintain a record of water treatment operations available for public inspection by appointment. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-29, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-23. Continuity of service, consistency of quality.
The water service provider shall make every reasonable effort to provide continuous service and potable water. The city does not warrant that system malfunctions will not result in service interruptions or pressure changes, nor does it guarantee that water quality will not vary, nor does it guarantee that it will be directly suitable for special commercial or industrial processes. The city assumes no liability for damages caused by varying pressure, interrupted service or water quality changes. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-30, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-24. Emergency restriction of service.
(a)	The city and water service provider reserve the right to shut off or diminish flow in system mains due to repairs, emergencies or water shortage. Notice shall be given in the event of water shortage or prolonged routine maintenance interruptions of service. Notice is not required for emergency diversions of water or emergency repairs. 
(b)	During periods of dry weather, upon determination that a water shortage or potential water shortage exists to the extent that the water system may not have sufficient flows for domestic service and fire protection, the mayor or city council may issue such warning to the public as appropriate to effect conservation measures or the mayor or city council may by resolution direct that unessential water usages, such as lawn watering and automobile washing, may be restricted to certain hours of the day or not permitted at all until the shortage or potential shortage no longer exists. Persons shall not violate such an order. 
(c)	Any person who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required either by this section or by a resolution of the city council, upon citation and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with this section and section 1-11. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(d)	For a first violation of the provisions of this section or of a resolution approved by the city council pursuant to this section, the director of community development or designee shall issue a written warning of the violation and if the violation is not corrected immediately, a notice of violation shall be issued. If the first violation presents an imminent threat to public health or safety, the director of watershed management or designee shall issue an immediate citation in lieu of a written warning. 
(e)	Upon conviction of any violation of this section or of a resolution approved by the city council pursuant to this section, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $250.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court however, the total fine shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(f)	Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of this section or of a resolution approved by the city council pursuant to this section, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court however, the total fine shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(g)	Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of this section or of a resolution approved by the city council pursuant to this section, the court shall terminate water service to the property where the violation occurred for a period of time to be determined in the discretion of the court, impose a fine of not less than $1,000.00 and impose a minimum jail sentence of 24 hours. 
(h)	The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by this Code, county, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-31, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Sec. 25-25. Enlargement, improvement of water supply.
The city may contract for additional water sources to enlarge and improve the water supply. A public evaluation study prior to contracting shall be made to determine cost effectiveness and to assess the impact of substantial improvements. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-32, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-26. System financing.
The system shall be self-sustaining from its revenues, grants and other incomes. Expansions and improvements of service shall be effected using funds in system accounts or by sale of system revenue certificates. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-33, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-27. General maintenance and protection of service policy.
The city shall take all reasonable and necessary measures to protect the water system from contamination and to assure a continuous supply of potable water. Customers and other persons shall observe all procedures promulgated by the city to meet the above objectives with particular reference to the maintenance and protection procedures contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-34, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-28. Protection of water sources, storage facilities.
No person shall enter the premises of water storage facilities or reservoirs without authorization. No person shall place any contaminating substances in water sources or water storage facilities. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-35, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-29. Proximity of waterlines to sanitary sewers.
No sanitary sewer shall be placed within ten feet horizontally of a waterline nor less than three feet above or below a waterline without special protection approved by the department. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-37, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-30. Surge protection.
Customers shall not employ fast-acting valves on any line or connection thereto without surge protection approved by the city or county. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-39, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-31. Electrical grounding.
No new or revamped wiring systems or electrical appliances that may induce shock shall be grounded to the water system or connected thereto. Grounding rods or other devices will be employed. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-40, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-32. Covering of appurtenances.
Pavement or earthwork shall not be placed over any valve or box cover nor shall such appurtenances to the system be rendered inaccessible. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-41, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-33. Location, ownership of facilities.
The entire water system up to and including meters is the property of the water service provider, except for other water systems connected by agreement. In no case shall mains or appurtenances be placed outside of public rights-of-way or appropriate easements. Title shall not be conveyed for mains or appurtenances without simultaneous conveyance of necessary easements or rights-of-way. Title to any water system property or components shall not be conveyed to any person unless the water service provider approve such to be obsolete, surplus, and not needed in long-range system plans and further provided that the water service provider receives compensation or credit in amount of fair market value. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-43, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-34. Inspection of premises; right of entry.
(a)	Application for water service shall constitute agreement that a customer shall allow the city water service provider inspection of the premises for violation of this article, maintenance of the system, meter reading, testing, surveys, and inspection of waterline construction. Entry to premises for any purpose other than routine and agreed-upon operations shall be preceded by due notice served as provided in this section. 
(b)	Due notice shall consist of a certified letter, return receipt requested, being mailed to the person refusing to allow entry. This notice shall require acknowledgement and agreement of that person to allow entry, giving ten days' time after receipt of due notice for this to be made. When due notice is given for purpose of access for surveys or inspection, acknowledgement and agreement to allow entry shall be made within the same ten days and no offense is presumed. Thereafter the city may issue citations by certified letter for each day of violation now presumed only after issuing a second due notice for violation as outlined above. 
(c)	The city and its authorized agents and employees may enter upon any lands in the city for the purpose of making such surveys, soundings, drillings, and examinations as may be deemed necessary or desirable to accomplish the purposes of planning and engineering water system improvements; and such entry shall not be deemed a trespass nor shall it be deemed an entry which would constitute a taking in a condemnation proceeding, providing that reasonable notice of such entry shall be done in a reasonable manner with as little inconvenience as possible to the owner or occupant of the property, and the county shall make reimbursement for any actual damages resulting from such entry. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-44, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-35—25-57. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ILLEGAL USE OF WATER REGULATIONS
Sec. 25-58. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2 or elsewhere in this chapter, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment, multifamily dwelling, roominghouse, restaurant, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever but does not include a single-family dwelling or a condominium. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.1, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-59. Illegal use of water.
It is unlawful for any person to obtain water from the water system with the intent to avoid payment for the water. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.2, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-60. Fraudulent representation for use of water.
It is unlawful to make a false representation on the application for water service to any premises, or to use water in or upon any premises for purposes not set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.3, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-61. Unauthorized connections prohibited.
No person shall connect to, tap on, or discharge water from any water line or water main belonging to the water service provider without first obtaining the written permission to do so and without first paying the required deposit, tap fee, and/or connection charge. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.4, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-62. Unauthorized reconnection prohibited.
No person shall reconnect or turn on any water connection where the water connection has been disconnected for nonpayment of water bills, or for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.5, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-63. Damage of any appurtenances to water supply system prohibited.
No person shall damage, destroy, deface, impair the function of, or otherwise vandalize any portion of the water supply system. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.6, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-64. Meter tampering prohibited.
No person shall break, alter, change the reading of, or tamper with the mechanism of any water meter. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.7, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-65. Bypassing meter prohibited.
No person shall attach any pipe, device or mechanism of any kind or type to any water line, pipe, meter, or main in such a manner as to cause any water to flow through, by or around any water meter without the meter properly measuring and recording the quantity thereof. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.8, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-66. Permission required to use unmetered water.
No person shall attach any pipe, device or other mechanism of any kind or type to any water line, pipe or main where a water meter has not been installed and the water taken does not flow through a water meter without first obtaining written permission from the water service provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.9, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-67. Fire hydrants.
(a)	No person shall attach a hose, pipe or other mechanism to a fire hydrant or open a fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission except in case of a fire. 
(b)	No person shall be allowed to use water from any fire hydrant connected to the water system, except by special permit from the director of the department of watershed management or the fire chief, except in case of fire. 
(1)	Schedule of charges. In cases where a special permit is issued, the water service provider shall install a hydrant meter with a backflow preventer. The quantity of water used shall be charged to the customer at the prevailing rates in effect at the time of usage of water. 
(2)	Deposits required. A deposit, as established from time to time by the water service provider, shall be required with each application for installation of a hydrant meter. Part of the deposit may be credited against the water charge for the hydrant usage when the meter is removed. If the meter is damaged prior to removal by the water service provider, the deposit shall be forfeited and retained by the water service provider. 
(3)	Backflow prevention. Proper backflow prevention measures shall be used in the manner required by the cross connection control survey team. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.10, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-68. Unauthorized possession of a fire hydrant meter.
It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession any unauthorized fire hydrant meter. Fire hydrant meters shall be installed by the water service provider after the requesting party completes an application and pays applicable fees. The hydrant meter shall be installed as close as possible to the requested location. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.11, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-69. Unauthorized operation of valves or other water system control or regulating devices.
No person shall operate or change the adjustment of any water system valve, pressure regulating device, or other water system control device without first obtaining written approval from the director of the water service provider or their designee. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.12, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-70. Water to be cut off in case of violation.
If any person, either as owner or tenant, shall violate or permit other persons to violate any provision of this division, the supply of water to the premises shall be shut off and service discontinued forthwith. The water shall not again be turned on until such unauthorized use of water is stopped and there shall have been paid such charges are determined to be due for water used in violation of this division and for the expense of discontinuing and restoring water service. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.13, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-71. Criminal penalties.
(a)	Any person who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by these illegal use of water regulations, upon citation and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with section 1-11. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)	Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court however, the total fine shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(c)	Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $1,000.00 and impose a minimum jail sentence of 24 hours. 
(d)	The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by this Code, county, state, or federal law. No provision of this division shall prevent the city from prosecuting the crime of theft of services to the fullest extent allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-50.14, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Secs. 25-72—25-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. WATER WASTE
Sec. 25-101. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to construction shall be as defined in this Code and in the latest adopted applicable editions of the Georgia codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to state law. 
Economic hardship means a cost to comply with the requirements of section 25-102 that exceeds $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-55, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-102. Waste of water.
It is unlawful for any person to allow water to be wasted by leaks, breaks, or malfunctions in any water pipe or fixture on premises owned or occupied by that person. If a person does not repair or report a leak, a break or a malfunction for any period of time beyond which the leak, break, or malfunction reasonably should have been corrected, water service may be terminated to the premises. A period of two business days after the person discovers such leak, break, or malfunction, or within two business days of receiving a notice of such condition, whichever comes first, shall be presumed to be a reasonable time within which the person shall correct such a condition. Notice shall be hand delivered or posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. If the leak, break, or malfunction poses a public health, public safety, or environmental threat to the citizens of the city, water service may be terminated immediately with no notice to the occupant of the premises. Water service to the premises shall not be restored until the leak, break, or malfunction is repaired, and all outstanding water bills, including the administrative fees for termination and restoration of water service, have been paid. The water service provider shall promulgate a written policy for crediting accounts for water leaks occurring before the leaks are discovered by the property owner or before the property owner receives written notification. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-56, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-103. Economic hardships.
Any person who can provide proof of economic hardship may petition the water service provider, within two business days after the person discovers such leak, break, or malfunction, or within two business days of receiving a notice of such condition, for additional time to repair a leak, a break, or a malfunction. Should petition be granted the petitioner will receive no more than an additional 15 business days to correct the condition and, during this period, water service to the premises shall not be terminated. The petitioner shall be responsible for all costs and associated fees of water usage and wastage following the initial two-business-day period after discovery or notification until the leak, break, or malfunction is corrected. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-57, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-104—25-134. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE
Sec. 25-135. Planned extensions to developed areas.
The water service provider may, as part of its continuing service to residents, extend water service without petition to developed areas presently obtaining service from other sources. In such cases, a property owner must tie onto the water service provider's system if service is available within 300 feet of the premises' property line after due notice from the water service provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-61, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-136. Planned extensions to developing areas.
The water service provider may, as part of its continuing service to residents, extend water service to areas planned for development or in the course of development provided that cost benefits analysis shows projected revenues or cost participation to be sufficient to warrant extension. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-62, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-137. Incorporation of private systems.
Existing water systems in apartment and condominium developments, office complexes and similar developments including subdivision water mains may be incorporated into the water system on approval by the water service provider. System water mains and appurtenances must meet county standards for materials and design. Remedial work costs to meet standards shall be borne by developers, owners or customers using or administering the system prior to conveyance. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-63, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-138. Requests for installation of water mains on existing city roads.
(a)	A request for the installation of a water main by city residents who live on existing city roads not serviced by the water system shall be presented to the water service provider on petition forms provided by the water service provider. The petitioner shall agree to pay the service connection charge for each residence prior to installation of the new main for use when the main is complete. This purchase will not be required if the petitioner has previously purchased a meter for the address in the petition. 
(b)	A maximum of 100 linear feet of water main will be installed by the water service provider for each petitioner without charge. If additional footage is required to serve all petitioners, the petitioners shall reimburse the water service provider for any excess footage at the per-linear-foot charge of an eight-inch line based upon the actual estimated cost of construction. This sum shall be on a pro rata basis or in a specified amount for each petitioner listed on the petition with the total of the amounts specified equaling the total reimbursable cost. Pro rata costs shall be equally divided based on the total number of petitioners rather than on the length required to cover the frontage of each petitioner. 
(c)	Prior to submission of the petition, the petitioner shall be provided with cost data by the water service provider for the total length of water main installation required. The petition shall be presented to the water service provider at which time a preliminary design will be prepared for the water main as submitted. If a water main larger than eight inches is required to conform with plans for future water service, cost data shall be prepared for both the eight-inch and larger mains and the water service provider shall bear the difference in cost at that time. 
(d)	Before the final approval of the petition, the water service provider shall coordinate with the county board of health to ascertain whether any health hazards exist in the petition area that may be alleviated or corrected by the installation of the requested water main. 
(e)	This information shall be presented for consideration for final approval by the authorizing authority together with the petition and estimate of cost for review and decision. 
(f)	The provisions of this section may be waived by the authorizing authority at its discretion, particularly in those instances where the board of health has determined that a health hazard exists as a consequence of the use of private water supply systems. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-64, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-139. Developer requests for extension or replacement of water mains on existing city roads.
Developer requests for the extension or replacement of water mains on existing city roads shall be processed as follows: 
(1)	In the event the water service provider's plans for future water service call for a main to be installed larger than the size of the main required to supply the development, then the water service provider may pay the difference in cost of the materials to install the size main required by the water service provider. The comparison of material costs will be based upon the water service provider's material cost for the larger pipe. Payment by the water service provider will be made upon completion and satisfactory inspection of the work and upon receipt of a maintenance bond equal to ten percent of the cost of the construction of the water to ten percent of the cost of the construction of the water facility. The developer may provide a letter of escrow or letter of credit acceptable in lieu of the maintenance bond required in this section. An eight-inch main will be considered as the minimum size main required to supply a development of any size. 
(2)	Water main design shall be accomplished by water service provider's water system engineers unless otherwise authorized by the water service provider. 
(3)	When the developer completes his work in accordance with water service provider specifications and the work has been duly inspected by the water service provider, the developer shall provide "as-built" drawings in accordance with section 25-140(2) and any required easements for the water main installation. 
(4)	After the work has been completed and inspected to the satisfaction of the water service provider, the developer shall provide a maintenance bond equal to ten percent of the costs of the construction of such facilities. The developer may provide a letter of escrow or letter of credit acceptable to the water service provider in lieu of the maintenance bond required in this section. 
(5)	The developer shall be required to maintain the water lines for a period of 12 months. During this developer maintenance period, the water service provider shall make inspections and instruct the developer by letter as to what corrections must be made, if any. 
(6)	At the end of the 12-month developer maintenance period, the water service provider shall make a final inspection and notify the developer and the bonding company, if any, of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable at this time, the maintenance bond, letter of escrow or letter of credit shall be released. 
(7)	If required corrections are not made within 30 days of notice, the water service provider shall have the authority to make these corrections at the expense of the bonding company. In cases where funds are being held under letter of credit or letter of escrow, the cost of making these corrections shall be drawn by the water service provider from these funds, and the developer charged with any costs above the amount of such funds. 
(8)	The water service provider shall have full authority to inspect, test and sterilize all water mains installed under this section. 
(9)	No use shall be made of such systems nor shall the water service provider accept such systems until the developer has complied with all the requirements of this section and until satisfactory sterilization and tests have been completed. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-65, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-140. Installation of water mains in residential subdivisions.
Water mains installed in residential subdivisions shall be installed subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	Water mains shall be designed by the water service provider. 
(2)	Installation shall be accomplished by a qualified contractor and shall be in accordance with latest water service provider specifications. Upon completion of the water line construction, an engineer registered in the state must provide a statement that the system, as installed, is in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
(3)	The water service provider shall have full authority to inspect, test and require sterilization of all water mains. No use shall be made of such systems until satisfactory sterilization and test have been completed. 
(4)	If it is necessary to route the proposed water main through private property of the developer for circulation or supply purposes, the developer will provide the water service provider with the required easements. Requests for water mains should be submitted to the water service provider after the development plat has been approved by the planning department. A drawing of the proposed development and a properly executed request form should be submitted in order that a layout and estimate of the cost may be prepared. All known requirements for water to satisfy the underwriters, as well as the needs of the prospective occupants, should be stated to assist in the preparation of the layout and estimate. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-66, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-141. Installation of water mains in dedicated streets of residential, commercial, industrial developments.
(a)	Installation of water mains in dedicated streets of residential, commercial and industrial developments shall be installed under the following conditions: 
(1)	Water mains to serve the development shall be designed by the water service provider. 
(2)	Installation shall be accomplished by a qualified contractor approved by the water service provider and shall be in accordance with latest water service provider's specifications. 
(3)	The water service provider shall have full authority to inspect, test and require sterilization of all water mains. No use shall be made of such systems until satisfactory sterilization and tests have been completed. 
(b)	Installation of water mains in commercial/industrial developments in other than dedicated streets shall be in accordance with the policy concerning shopping centers and other similar developments. 
(c)	Requests for water mains should be submitted to the water service provider after the development plat has been approved by the planning department. A drawing of the proposed development and properly executed request form should be submitted in order that a layout and estimate of the cost may be prepared by the water service provider. All known requirements for water to satisfy the underwriters, as well as the needs of the prospective occupants, should be stated to assist in the preparation of the layout and estimate. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-67, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-142. Installation of water mains in shopping centers, certain apartment and condominium developments, developments not dedicating streets to city.
(a)	Shopping centers, apartment and condominium developments of R-A5 or greater density, and similar developments which do not dedicate streets to the city shall be served by a master meter. In cases where fire protection is required to be installed, an eight-inch or larger fire line main may be served through an eight-inch or larger master meter and potable water service taken from the fire line main within the development. As an alternate to this, an unmetered fire line may be installed with a separate master-metered potable water service line. Exception to the requirement for the master meter may be made when, in the opinion of the water service provider, conditions are such that the installation of individual meters within the development would prove more feasible than serving the development by a master meter. 
(b)	Installation of an eight-inch or larger water main within developments shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	Design of all lines six inches and larger shall be approved by the water service provider, and all materials used in construction of the water main shall be in accordance with water service provider specifications. 
(2)	All water main materials and labor shall be paid for by the developer, and installation shall be in accordance with water service provider specifications and by a qualified contractor. 
(3)	The water service provider shall have the full authority to inspect, test and require sterilization of all water mains. No use shall be made of such water mains until satisfactory sterilization and tests have been completed. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-68, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-143. Purchase of materials for water system construction on private property.
(a)	A water system constructed on private property will not be accepted for maintenance by the water service provider unless all water line and appurtenant materials required for the installation are inspected by the water service provider prior to construction and are found to meet the water service provider specifications. 
(b)	All water system construction on private property must be inspected by the water service provider during construction before maintenance acceptance will be considered. 
(c)	Any planned water system construction considered as private by the owner during the permitting and development review stage of plans review will remain private unless subsections (a) and (b) of this section are complied with. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-69, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-144—25-169. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. INITIATION, CONNECTION AND TERMINATION OF SERVICE
Sec. 25-170. Application for service for all classifications.
Persons desiring water service shall file application with the water service provider and sign a standard contract form prior to receiving service. Application shall be made in person by customer or agent. A prospective customer will be assigned to the proper user classification. Separate application is required for each classification of service desired. A completed application in the form prescribed by the water service provider shall be received at least ten days prior to service connection availability. The use of water service binds a person as if such person had signed a contract. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-81, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-171. Application for miscellaneous services.
Written application for miscellaneous services shall be made to the water service provider, which shall prescribe uniform procedures and guidelines for initiation of such services. Miscellaneous services shall be scheduled in the order of approved application except in cases of emergency or requirement for financial participation by the water service provider requiring approval of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-82, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-172. New service connections.
Where a service line does not exist to premises, the water service provider shall tap the water main and install a service line, including meter, meter box and service cock. Service connection shall be made only by an authorized person. No contractor, plumber or other person shall tap any water main without written permission from the water service provider. The customer at this point shall connect the plumbing to the water system. Only one service line shall be provided per application. Service cocks shall be operated only by an authorized contractor or plumber making repairs on plumbing or waterlines, or by an authorized person. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-83, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-173. Existing connections.
Where a service line exists, the water service provider shall determine whether this service line is to be used or requires replacement. Where service line replacement is required, the application shall be charged as though it were a new service connection. Service connection shall be made as provided for a new service connection. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-84, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-174. Metering.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where words have not been defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. 
Apartment means one or more rooms with a private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self-contained residential unit in a buildings. 
Condominium is defined in the same manner as it is defined in section 27-1351. 
Master meter means a utility-owned meter that measures and totalizes the volume of water flowing from the water distribution system into a multifamily dwelling unit as that term is defined in section 27-1361, building piping system. 
Newly constructed apartment means any structure for which a building permit for construction of an apartment is issued after June 1, 2008. 
Newly constructed single-family dwelling or condominium means any structure for which a building permit for construction of a single-family dwelling or condominium is issued after June 1, 2008. 
Separate water meter means a utility-owned meter that measures and totalizes the volume of water flowing from the water distribution system into a single-family dwelling or condominium's piping system. 
Single-family dwelling is defined in the same manner as it is defined in section 27-1352 but also includes dwelling units on an individual lot attached to another dwelling unit by a common party wall, commonly referred to as a townhouse or town home. 
Sub-unit water meter means water meters owned and managed by the property owner with a utility-owned master meter that bills for water service based on volume of use. Sub-unit water meters shall allow for the water use in each apartment to be tracked separately. 
(b)	Meters. All users except those classified as fire line users shall be metered. All meters shall be sized on the basis of expected volume of water usage. All meters, except sub-meters, are part of the service line provided by the water service provider and are the property of the water service provider. 
(c)	Sub-unit water meters for newly constructed apartments. No water shall be furnished to any newly constructed apartment except through sub-unit water meters so that the water use in each apartment can be accurately tracked. Sub-unit water meters allow tenants to know how much water they use and may encourage wiser use of water. Water service however, shall be billed by the water service provider on a master meter basis and the property owner and/or landlord is responsible for paying the water service provider for all charges contained in such bills. The enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived in no way prevents property owners and/or landlords from using sub-unit water meters to bill each tenant for actual water usage which will encourage wiser use of water by tenants in apartments. 
(d)	Separate water meters for single-family dwellings and condominiums. No water shall be furnished to any newly constructed single-family dwelling or condominium except through separate water meters. Water service shall be billed by the water service provider to the property owner based on individual unit water meters and each property owner is responsible for paying the water service provider for all charges contained in such bills. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-85, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-175. Inspection of service connections.
All plumbing or yard piping connections to a service line shall be subject to inspection by an authorized person prior to service connection. Refusal to allow inspection shall result in refusal of service until inspection is permitted. Inspection may include requirement that plumbing and piping plans be submitted where, in the director's opinion, possibility of system contamination or cross connection may result from service connection. In no case shall service connection be made until all inspection requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-86, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-176. Refusal of service.
Water service may be refused only for the following justifications; reapplication may be made where reasons are rectified: 
(1)	Refusal to allow entry. Where admittance to property for necessary work or inspection is not allowed, the water service provider may refuse service. 
(2)	Damage to system by connection. Where in the opinion of the city or water service provider that connection will seriously reduce system pressure and fire protection, the water service provider may refuse service. 
(3)	Remoteness from system. Where connection requires investment in transmission mains that would not be justified by likely revenues, the water service provider may refuse service or require substantial cost sharing by the customer. 
(4)	Technical infeasibility. Where connection would require special pumps or other devices to effect service, the water service provider may refuse service or require substantial cost sharing by the customer. 
(5)	Health hazard. Where connection could cause contamination of the system, the water service provider may refuse service. 
(6)	Unpaid water bills. New connections or reconnections shall not be made until all previous financial obligations to the system have been met or resolved. This subsection only applies to owner-occupied property. 
(7)	Fraudulent misrepresentation in application. If water service has been approved for a location, and thereafter it is determined that the application for the water service contained false or misleading information or omitted material facts, or that the water is being used in or upon the premises for purposes not set forth in the application made for the water service, then the water shall be shut-off by the water service provider, and shall remain shut-off by the water service provider, until the application for water service has been corrected to the satisfaction of the water service provider or until all unauthorized use of water has ceased and any past due sums payable for the water service account have been fully paid to the water service provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-87, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-177. Customer-requested termination.
A customer shall give at least ten days' notice of desire to terminate service to the water service provider, who will advise the customer of approximate date. However, the water service provider is not bound to terminate on a certain date. Service turnoff shall be done only by an authorized person. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-88, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-178. Termination due to violations of operating and maintenance procedure.
(a)	If the water service provider determines that procedures established by the water service provider for operating and maintaining the system are being violated by a user or other person, the water service provider will give due notice as provided herein. If such violation continues, service to the responsible person shall be terminated and penal actions as provided herein may be taken. 
(b)	Assessments of all penalties shall be preceded by due notice, except in case of emergency requiring termination of service. Due notice shall be given by a certified letter, return receipt requested, mailed to the person presumed to be violating a section of this article. This notice shall set forth remedial action required of that person, giving ten days' time after receipt of due notice for remedial action to be completed. If the water service provider determines after this period that the violation continues unremedied, the water service provider may recommend to the proper authorities that the presumed violator be cited for each day that the violation continues unresolved not including the ten-day period. 
(c)	When due notice is given for purpose of access for surveys or inspection, acknowledgement and agreement to allow entry shall be made within the same ten days and no offense is presumed. Thereafter, the city or its authorized agents may issue citations by certified letter for each day of violation now presumed only after issuing a second due notice for violation as outlined in this section. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-89, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-179. Termination due to improper usage.
(a)	The making of improper connections to the system endangering system integrity or possibly leading to system contamination shall be cause for immediate termination of service. Restoration of service after rectification of improper connection shall be treated as a reconnection. Improper usage not determined by the city or water service provider to be of emergency potential shall result in termination after due notice is given. 
(b)	Assessments of all penalties shall be preceded by due notice, except in case of emergency requiring termination of service. Due notice shall be given by a certified letter, return receipt requested, mailed to the person presumed to be violating a section of this article. This notice shall set forth remedial action required of that person, giving ten days' time after receipt of due notice for remedial action to be completed. If the city or water service provider determines after this period that the violation continues unremedied, the city or water service provider may recommend to the proper authorities that the presumed violator be cited for each day that the violation continues unresolved not including the ten-day period. 
(c)	When due notice is given for purpose of access for surveys or inspection, acknowledgement and agreement to allow entry shall be made within the same ten days and no offense is presumed. Thereafter, the city or its authorized agents may issue citations by certified letter for each day of violation now presumed only after issuing a second due notice for violation as outlined in this section. 
(d)	Any person or user of the system who has been found to be in violation of mandatory water restrictions or mandatory water conservation policies shall first be issued a notice of violation. If the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the director, a summons shall be issued for the violator to appear in municipal court. If the person or user of the system continues to be in violation of mandatory water restrictions or mandatory water conservation policies thereafter, the continuing violation shall be cause for immediate termination of service. Restoration of service after rectification shall be treated as a reconnection. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-90, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-180. Violations and penalties.
(a)	Whenever it has been determined that a violation of this article has occurred, a notice of violation shall be served upon the violator. The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, and state that, if the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time, a summons shall be issued for the violator to appear in municipal court. The notice of violation shall set forth the potential penalty involved and the fact that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(b)	If the violation has not been remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation, a summons shall be issued to the violator to appear in municipal court. The summons shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, set forth the penalty if the violator is convicted of the violation, and state that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(c)	Notwithstanding the foregoing, a summons may be issued to appear in municipal court or terminate connection to the water system without first issuing a notice of violation if, the violation constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, general welfare, or to the water system. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city or its authorized agents to take any action, including emergency action to terminate connection to the water system or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(d)	Any person who shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article and upon conviction in municipal court shall be subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-11. Each day of violation is considered a separate offense and is subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-91, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Sec. 25-181. Authority to write summons.
The director may designate authorized personnel to write summons to appear before a court pertaining to violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-92, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-182—25-200. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 25-201. Established; revenue collection.
(a)	All water system rates and charges shall be as established by action of the water service provider and their governing authority. 
(b)	Procedures for revenue collection shall be established by the water service provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-101, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-202. Classification of users.
The following list of system users establishes classifications of service as a basis of charges: 
(1)	Single. All dwelling, commercial and industrial customers are in this classification who use all of the water supplied through a connection for any use besides fire protection. 
(2)	Fire line. A customer shall only use the connection applied for under this classification for fire protection. 
(3)	Combined potable and fire line. Any shopping center and/or other development served by a combination potable and fire line located outside the public right-of-way shall be classified as a combined potable and fire line user, where either of the following exists: 
a.	A fire line main is served through a master meter with potable water service taken from that fire line main within the development. 
b.	Potable water is taken from the fire line through multiple meters. 
(4)	Multiple. No multiple dwelling, commercial or industrial customers shall be on one meter, except in case of apartments, shopping centers and office parks, where in the judgment of the water service provider multiple meters are impractical. Approved multiple category customers shall have one meter per premises and shall be charged as single category users. 
(5)	Temporary. Temporary use permits shall be granted for periods not exceeding 30 days. After permit expiration the water service provider may, at its option, renew the permit or assign the customer to a permanent classification. This service shall not be used for permanent installation. 
(6)	Flat rate. Any existing flat rate customers shall be changed to single or fire line as appropriate. There shall be no unmetered or flat rate customers except as provided under temporary and fire line classifications. 
(7)	Contract. Contract users shall include only counties and incorporated municipalities with separate water systems. The service is provided by agreement. 
(8)	Illegal. Any user who has not made application for service and received a service connection or whose service has been terminated or who uses a connection for purposes other than as provided in the user's assigned classification is an illegal user. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-102, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-203. Recurring charges.
The following charges are set by the water service provider and shall be billed on a recurring basis as continuing charges: 
(1)	Service. All classifications of users except fire line shall be billed a base charge for service availability, whether service is used or not. This charge shall be fixed on the basis of meter size. For combined potable and fire line users who provide a specific means of determining the requirements of the development, such as by the installation of private meters by the owner, the service charge shall be based on the number and size of private meters installed. 
(2)	Commodity. All classifications of users except fire line shall be billed a commodity charge in addition to a service charge on the basis of actual volume of water delivered at the single unit volume rate set by the water service provider. 
(3)	Fire line. Fire line customers shall be billed for service availability on the basis of diameter of connection to system mains and number of fire hydrants on premises. If a building complex has establishments each with different owners, then the fire line charges will be prorated by the water service provider based on square footage protected. For combined potable and fire line users: 
a.	Where fire hydrants are installed on private lines served through a master meter and/or where such lines serve building sprinkler systems, the owner will be billed for fire service availability on the basis of diameter of connection required to the system mains for fire protection only and on the number of hydrants. There will be no charge, however, for any hydrant which is determined by the county to be adjacent to and available to a public roadway. In addition, potable water readiness to serve charge will be based on the size line required for estimated average flow based on commodity billing as determined by the water service provider. 
b.	Where an owner elects to dedicate lines and rights-of-way outside the public road right-of-way in order to utilize multiple meters and where such lines have hydrants installed or serve building sprinkler systems, the owner will be billed for fire service availability on the basis of diameter of connection required to the system mains for fire protection only and on the number of fire hydrants. There will be no charge, however, for any hydrant which is determined to be adjacent to and available to a public roadway. If a building complex has establishments each with different owners, then the fire line charges will be prorated by the water service provider based on square footage protected. 
(4)	Contract. Contract service is only by agreement. Billing shall be on the basis of a service charge plus metered volume of water delivered at the unit volume rate set by the contract. Billing shall be at equal periods set by the contract and not less than semiannually. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-103, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-204. Miscellaneous charges.
(a)	Certain noncontinuous services provided by the county water system have set charges as designated by the water service provider. Charges shall be reviewed from time to time to assure that they cover the cost of services. 
(b)	A charge shall be set by the water service provider for installing a service line and meter based on the size of the meter. This charge shall apply to all classifications except fire line users. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-104, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-205. Special assessments.
The following charges must be ascertained by the water service provider on a case-by-case basis reflecting exigencies involved: 
(1)	Damage. The water service provider shall determine charges to be assessed against any person causing damage to any part of the water system. 
(2)	Unauthorized activity. Such actions include any connection to or tampering with the system without prior approval of the water service provider. Charges assessed shall reflect the water service provider's assessment of costs involved in inspecting such work or in taking remedial action. Additionally, persons involved shall be assessed such charges as would apply were the work preauthorized and shall be subject to other penalties. 
(3)	Replacement of improvements. Persons engaged in work affecting or connecting to the system shall bear the total cost of replacement of any improvements or for making such improvements whole again. These include, but are not limited to, grassing, embankments, pavement and base curbing to city standards. After due notice, the city may elect to proceed with restorative work and charge the damaging person on a materials and force account basis. 
(4)	Service termination. A single charge shall be set for termination of service whether initiated by the customer or by the water service provider. Customers relocating within the system service area must terminate old service and make new application. 
(5)	Reconnection fee. A charge shall be set for resumption of service to a customer where termination was due to failure to pay bills. New or relocated customers using an existing service line are charged under this subsection. All previous bills shall be paid before a service reconnection will be made. This subsection only applies to owner-occupied property. 
(6)	Meter testing. The water service provider may periodically test all meters on its system. A customer may request a test to be made without charge. 
(7)	Tap fee. A fee shall be set by the water service provider for providing a connection for a service line or water main to an existing or new water main. Fee shall be based on diameter of service line or water main to be connected to the tap. 
(8)	Inspection and sterilization. The water service provider shall establish a list of charges for inspection and line sterilization which shall apply to various categories of construction, duly reflecting force and material requirements. 
(9)	Temporary use. Temporary use charges shall be set by the water service provider on a case-by-case basis; such fees shall be no less than the sum of appropriate recurring charges and miscellaneous charges. Such temporary uses, whether connected to mains or fire hydrants, shall be metered. Fire hydrant connections shall also be approved by the department of fire and rescue services. 
(10)	Other services. For any services not falling within these definitions, the water service provider may fix a charge on the basis of cost of labor and materials required. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-105, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-206. Revenue collections.
(a)	Payment. A meter reading of all water meters and fire line checks shall be made by the water service provider on a regular basis. All bills are issued by and shall be paid to the water service provider. Payment is due within ten days of issuance and may be made by mail or in person at the address noted on the statement. Failure to receive the bill shall not relieve the customer of payment responsibility. 
(b)	Delinquent payment. Notice of delinquent payment shall require payment within ten days of the date due. Service will be terminated after that period without notice. Failure to receive a bill shall not relieve a customer of payment responsibility. 
(c)	Excess payments and refunds. Excess payments for all customers shall be credited to the next billing unless service is terminated or written refund request is made. 
(d)	Liability of owner. When service is terminated to a rented premises, service may be restored to the premises upon request of a party, renter or owner, who is not personally liable for or who did not personally apply for water service previously and who was previously not delinquent in payment of the water bill at these premises. 
(e)	Estimated bills. The water service provider may estimate bills in the case of a broken, inaccurate or inaccessible meter on the basis of previous billings, adding retroactive charges where appropriate. 
(f)	Contested charges. A customer may make written notice of an error in charges. In such cases the customer shall make payment equal to that portion of charges uncontested or equal to previous billing, whichever is larger, by payment due date. The water service provider will review contested charges and adjust the next billing as appropriate. The customer may make written request for a hearing with the water service provider or the water service provider's representative if the review is unsatisfactory. Payment must be made for reviewed contested charges when due. Credit shall be made if findings are reversed by the water service provider, whose decision is final. 
(g)	Discounts. No discounts shall be made for payments due or for large volume use. Discounts in the form of credits or refunds may be made for change in meter sizes or charged materials returned to the water service provider in satisfactory condition. 
(h)	Application fee. Any applicant for water or sewer service shall complete an application for service, shall provide the water service provider with identification for billing purposes, and shall pay an application fee to the water service provider. Application fees shall be set by the water service provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-106, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-207—25-235. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS
Sec. 25-236. Water purity, protection and sanitation criteria to govern.
Private water systems and vendors shall be governed by all criteria in this chapter relating to water purity, protection of supply and system sanitation, and shall be licensed by the water service provider or its designee. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-126, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-237. Approval of plans.
All plans for private water systems shall be prepared by an engineer of the county and approved by the water service provider prior to construction. Materials of construction shall meet minimum standards set by the county for the public water system. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-127, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-238. Connection to public water system.
No connection shall be made between the public water system and a private water system except by approval of the water service provider. Such approved connections shall be metered and equipped with backflow prevention devices approved by the water service provider and subject to all conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-128, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-239. No city or water service provider warranty.
By its regulation of private water systems and suppliers, the city or water service provider assumes no liability for the purity of such water or for damages caused by operators of private facilities. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-129, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-240—25-256. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 25-257. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approval authority means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, municipal permitting program. 
Authorized person means a regular employee of the city or its authorized agents authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. Authorized representative of the user: 
(1)	If the user is a corporation: 
a.	The president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.	The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)	If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)	If the user is a federal, state or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his designee. 
(4)	The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the department. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 200 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge of wastes from the drainage pipes within the walls of a building and conveys this discharge to the building sewer beginning ten feet outside the inner face of the building. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sanitary sewer system or other place of disposal. 
Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits, promulgated by the federal EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR 405—471. 
Categorical user means any significant industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the amount of oxygen equivalent that the organic matter in a sample utilizes in the presence of a strong chemical oxidant (expressed in milligrams per liter). 
Combined sewer means a sewer intentionally receiving groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters together with sewage. 
Constituents means the combination of particles or pollutants which exist in wastes. 
Control manhole means a manhole on or near a user's property used for sampling purposes through which the user's discharge to the sanitary sewer passes. 
Department means the public works or water service provider. 
Designated area means any tract of land, parcel of land, subdivision or section of the city which, by virtue of its topography or existing sanitary sewer facilities, can be treated as a unit. The director shall be the sole judge as to the boundaries, limits, and extent of these areas, whether or not these areas abut present public roads. 
Director means the public works director or any of that person's authorized or authorized agent of the sewer service provider. 
Environmental Protection Agency or Federal EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
EPD means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the Federal EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Federal Clean Water Act or Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, presently codified at 33 USC 1250 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
Flammable means any material which is easily ignited and burns with unusual rapidity as defined by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce, tin cans, glass containers and newspapers. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes and solid and gaseous materials contained therein, of whatever nature, arising out of any manufacturing, processing, fabricating, treating, renovating or any other commercial operation. 
Inspection fee means the amount of money charged to the contractor or plumber for each inspection. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate of the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and therefore is a cause of violation of the county's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or thereunder, stringent regulations: permits issued or any more state or local section 405 of the Federal Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Lot of land means the smallest unit, owned by the same party or parties, into which any tract or parcel of land has been divided either by deed, plat or any other means of subdivision. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
New source means: 
(1)	Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Federal Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.	The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.	The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.	The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)	Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b or c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)	Construction that has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.	Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.	Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.	Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.	Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
Objectionable means unacceptable, unsatisfactory or displeasing to the physical senses. 
Outlet means point of discharge into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, stream or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's or county's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Plumbing fee means that fee paid for the issuance of a plumbing permit. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor). 
Premises means building, house, store, plant or any other place where people live, work or congregate. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment on a user other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standard or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
Priority pollutant means any contaminant in water which is identified as being toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic or is chemically similar to compounds identified as such, by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. The list includes 129 compounds and such other compounds as may be added from time to time, less any compound which may be deleted by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means the absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods, which have been cut in such a way that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sanitary sewers, with no particle larger than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sanitary sewer directly controlled by the city or sewer system provider and approved by the city or sewer system provider for use as a sanitary sewer. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means a "treatment works," as defined by section 212 of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the county. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Sanitary sewer means a pipe which carries sewage and by design excludes groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with the following: 
(1)	A sewer line constructed with unperforated pipe, with sealed joints, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub-out. 
(2)	A subsurface drainage field system consisting of piping and other materials producing drainage of the clarified discharge from the tank while distributing it underground to be filtered or absorbed. 
Sewage means the water-carried wastes, including human excrement and grey water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.) from residences, business buildings and institutions. 
Sewer means an artificial, usually subterranean, conduit to carry off sewage. 
Sewer system and sewerage mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, transporting and disposing of sewage. Sewer system provider means the city or any state, municipal or county government, department, or authority or any agency or authority which owns and/or operates the sewer system and sewage treatment facilities which the city has entered into intergovernmental agreement or contract to provided sewerage services within the city boundaries. 
Sewer tap fee or tap fee means the service charge for making a connection to the sewer system. 
Significant industrial user.
(1)	The term "significant industrial user" means: 
a.	A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
b.	A user that: 
1.	Discharges an average of 100,000 gallons per work month or 25,000 gallons per day of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
2.	Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
3.	Is designated as such by the county on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(2)	Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the sewer system provider may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of this article; or, any discharge in which the concentration of any given constituent exceeds, for any period longer than 15 minutes, five times the average 24-hour concentration of that constituent during normal operations. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, excluding sewage and industrial wastes. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Subdivision means any tract of land divided, planned or developed as a subdevelopment with two or more residences, buildings or building sites. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Tap fee or sewer tap fee means the service charge for making a connection to the sewer system. 
Unsanitary means unclean, unhealthy or harmful to the public health. 
User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater discharge permit means a permit in the form prescribed by the city or county, which establishes the wastewater characteristics which a significant industrial user may contribute or cause to be contributed to the sewer system. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-146, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-258. Certain agreements unaffected.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of: 
(1)	The Standards of Acceptability for Sewage Discharged into the Metropolitan Sewer System being annex C to the Metropolitan Sewer Agreement between the City of Atlanta and DeKalb County, dated July 16, 1968. 
(2)	The Sewer Agreement between DeKalb County and Gwinnett County, dated May 1971. 
(3)	The DeKalb-Clayton Conley Creek Drainage Area Sewer Agreement, dated November 13, 1973. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-147, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-259. Violations and penalties.
(a)	Whenever the director determines that a violation of this article has occurred, the director shall serve upon the violator a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, and state that, if the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the director, a summons shall be issued for the violator to appear in municipal court. The notice of violation shall set forth the potential penalty involved and the fact that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director may issue a summons to appear in municipal court without first issuing a notice of violation if, in the judgment of the director, the violation constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, general welfare, or to the sewer system. 
(c)	If the violation has not been remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation, the director shall issue a summons to the violator to appear in municipal court. The summons shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, set forth the penalty if the violator is convicted of the violation, and state that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(d)	Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency action action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(e)	Any person who shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article and upon conviction in municipal court shall be subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-11. Each day of violation is considered a separate offense and is subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-148, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Sec. 25-260. Authority to write summons.
The director may designate authorized personnel of the department to write summons to appear before a court to answer questions pertaining to violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-149, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-261. Right of entry; inspection and sampling of industrial or commercial properties.
The director and other employees designated by the director, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director or his designees ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)	Where the user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director or his designees will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)	The director or his designees shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operation. 
(3)	The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated quarterly to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director or his designees and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)	Unreasonable delays in allowing the director or his designees access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(6)	If the director or his designees has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as a part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city or county designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of an inspection warrant through the municipal court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-150, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-262. Right of entry to inspect private properties.
(a)	The director and the director's designated agents, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter during reasonable working hours, except in the event of an emergency, all private properties through which the city or county holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, measurement, maintenance, observation, repair and sampling any portion of the sewage system lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the specific easement pertaining to the property involved. Specific permission is granted the director and the director's designated agents, upon proper notification, to enter all private properties for the purpose of surveying or inspecting the premises, or sampling or monitoring of wastewater. While working on private properties referred to in this section, all city or sewer system provider employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises. The owner of the private properties shall not be held liable for injury to city or sewer system provider employees while on the owner's properties. 
(b)	The city or sewer system provider and its authorized agents and employees may enter upon any lands in the city for the purpose of making such surveys, soundings, drillings, and examinations as the city or sewer system provider may deem necessary or desirable to accomplish the purposes of planning and engineering sewer system improvements; and such entry shall not be deemed a trespass nor shall it be deemed an entry which would constitute a taking in a condemnation proceeding, providing that reasonable notice of such entry shall be done in a reasonable manner with as little inconvenience as possible to the owner or occupant of the property, and the city or sewer system provider shall make reimbursement for any actual damages resulting from such entry. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-151, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-263. Inspection warrants.
The director, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant for the purpose of inspection or investigation of conditions relating to the enforcement of this article, compliance with the terms of any permit, or observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to any federal or state regulation, and periodic investigations in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)	Inspection warrants may be issued by a court of competent jurisdiction when the issuing judge is satisfied that the director has established by oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection that includes the property or that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of the property. 
(2)	An inspection warrant will be validly issued only if it meets the following requirements: 
a.	The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. 
b.	The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or occupant of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. 
c.	The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. 
d.	The warrant refers, in general terms, to the Code provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-152, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-264. Discontinuance of water service for nonpayment of sewer bill.
(a)	This section only applies to owner-occupied property. The policy of discontinuing the furnishing of water at any meter service where there is a delinquent sewer bill after the occupant of the premises has been notified of the delinquency and has failed to remove the delinquency by payment of the bill is continued in full force and effect. 
(b)	Where there remains a delinquent sewer bill at any meter service after the occupant of the premises thereof has been notified by the inclusion of the amount of the past due bill in a current water bill or a separate bill and given an opportunity to pay the bill and refuses to promptly pay it, water service to this meter service shall be discontinued regardless of whether the bill remaining delinquent was incurred by a prior owner or occupant of the premises, and the water service provider shall not again supply water to this building, place or premises until the arrears are fully paid. 
(c)	Upon the failure or refusal of the owner or occupant to pay the delinquent sewer bill, the water service provider shall remove the meter serving the premises, and service shall not be restored to the premises until a fee for installation of a new meter has been paid in advance. Such fee shall be a fee in the amount established by action of the water service provider or its governing authority. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-153, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-265. Mandatory connections to public sanitary sewer.
(a)	The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation and other such purposes, located within the jurisdiction of the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located a public sanitary sewer, is required to install, at the owner's expense, suitable toilet facilities, and to connect such facilities directly to the public sanitary sewer. In accordance with the provisions of this article, the owner has 24 months after the date of official notice to accomplish this, provided that the public sanitary sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(b)	Exceptions to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section may be granted by the city upon application. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-154, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-266. Private sewage disposal facilities generally.
Except as specifically permitted by this article or by the board of health, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other similar facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-155, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-267. Discharge of untreated sewage or polluted waters.
It is unlawful to discharge to any outlet or to any portion of the public storm drain system, or to any natural stream within the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the county to treat the outflow from the public storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-156, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-268. Deposit of objectionable wastes on public or private property.
It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit the deposit of, in any unsanitary manner, human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable wastes on any public or private property within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-157, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-269. Nonavailability of public sanitary sewer.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to another means of sewage disposal. The private sewage disposal system must comply with all applicable regulations of the department, the county board of health, and the state department of human resources. Unless specific exceptions are made, a private sewage disposal facility in the city shall consist of an approved septic tank. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-158, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-270. General prohibition.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to maliciously or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any part of the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-159, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-271—25-288. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENTS
Sec. 25-289. Compliance with agreements.
The operation of the sanitary sewer system shall remain in compliance with all sanitary sewer usage agreements between the city and other county and municipal governments and agencies. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-176, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-290. Sanitary sewer main extensions.
(a)	The sanitary sewer main extension policy shall apply to the extension or replacement of existing sanitary sewer mains on existing roads or other dedicated rights-of-way to serve new developments. A developer may request the application of this policy if a project site is not adjacent to an existing main or the existing main is inadequate to serve the proposed development. 
(b)	The developer may apply for preapproval of the sewer main extension application with the understanding that such reimbursement shall be made only after the developer has complied with all the requirements of this section. Conversely, the developer may apply for reimbursement after complying with all the requirements of this section and such reimbursement shall be made on approved applications if funds are available for that purpose. Approval of all application requests shall be within the sole discretion of the sewer system provider. 
(c)	Sanitary sewer mains approved and installed under this section shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	All materials shall meet the specifications of the sewer system provider. 
(2)	A sanitary sewer main design shall be prepared by and furnished to the sewer system provider by a registered professional engineer licensed by the state. 
(3)	The developer shall contract for the installation of the sewer lines and shall furnish the city and sewer system provider a copy of the contract. When the work has been completed according to the sewer system provider specifications and duly inspected by the city or sewer system provider, the developer shall provide "as-built" drawings and any required easements of the sewer main installation to the sewer system provider. As-built drawings shall be completed under the direction of an engineer/land surveyor licensed in the state and sealed. 
(4)	After the work has been completed and inspected to the satisfaction of the city or sewer system provider, the developer shall provide a maintenance bond equal to ten percent of the costs of the construction of such facilities. The developer may provide a letter of escrow or letter of credit acceptable to the sewer system provider in lieu of the maintenance bond required in this section. 
(5)	After receiving the maintenance bond, letter of escrow or letter of credit, the sewer system provider shall reimburse the developer a sum equivalent to 50 percent of the cost of the sewer main materials required to supply the proposed development. An eight-inch main will be considered as the minimum size main required to supply a development of any size. In the event the sewer system provider's plans for future sewer service call for a sewer main to be installed larger than the size of the main required to supply the development, then the sewer system provider may: 
a.	If the size of sewer main planned by the sewer system provider is 15 inches or smaller, pay the difference in cost of the materials to install the size main required by the sewer system provider's plans. 
b.	If the size of sewer main planned by the sewer system provider is greater than 15 inches, pay the difference in both the cost of labor and materials to install the size main required by sewer system provider plans. 
(6)	The developer shall be required to maintain the sanitary sewer lines for a period of 12 months. During this developer maintenance period, the sewer system provider shall make inspections and instruct the developer by letter as to what corrections must be made, if any. 
(7)	At the end of the 12-month developer maintenance period, the sewer system provider shall make a final inspection and notify the developer and the bonding company, if any, of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable at this time, the maintenance bond, letter of escrow or letter of credit shall be released. 
(8)	If required corrections are not made within 30 days of notice, the sewer system provider shall have the authority to make these corrections at the expense of the bonding company. In cases where funds are being held under letter of credit or letter of escrow, the cost of making these corrections shall be drawn by the city or sewer system provider from these funds, and the developer charged with any costs above the amount of such funds. 
(9)	The sewer system provider shall have the full authority to inspect and test all sanitary sewer mains installed under this section. 
(10)	No use shall be made of such systems nor shall the sewer system provider accept such systems until the developer has complied with all the requirements of this section and until satisfactory tests and inspections have been completed by the sewer system provider. 
(11)	In calculating sewer system provider participation for material costs, the maximum material costs considered will be the sewer system provider's contract price for like material. 
(d)	Private sanitary sewer extensions will not be accepted for maintenance by the sewer system provider unless materials used for installation are inspected and approved by the sewer system provider prior to construction and are found to meet sewer system provider specifications and unless the installation was inspected by the city or sewer system provider during construction. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-177, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-291. Submission of petition.
(a)	Whenever the owners, as listed on the latest ad valorem tax digest, of 51 percent or more of the property within any designated area petition the sewer system provider for sewer facilities, and this action requires the laying of a lateral sewer, the petition shall be filed with the department. The petition shall be examined to see if the signatures are valid and if it sufficiently describes the services required. Then the sewer system provider shall initiate a preliminary engineering survey to make sure that the proper designated area is described. Cost for construction and engineering services are also estimated at this time. The petition is then advertised and a public hearing is held. If the petition is approved construction will be programmed. 
(b)	All assessments against property and the owners thereof for the construction of sewers shall be liens upon the property from the date of adoption of the resolution authorizing the construction of the sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-178, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-292. Public hearing; public notices.
When a petition for the construction of a sanitary sewer line has been filed on behalf of a person or when a recommendation for construction has been made by the head of any board or department, then a public hearing must be held before the governing authority of the sewer system provider. The department shall notify the governing authority of the impending petition. The department shall then give notice to all persons concerned by publication of a notice in the newspaper where sheriff's notices are published for a period of at least 20 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state the date and location of the proposed public hearing and shall give a general description of the proposed sanitary sewer construction. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-179, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-293. Notification to abutting property owners of public hearing.
In addition to the published notice of a public hearing on a petition for sanitary sewer construction, all owners of property abutting the proposed sanitary sewer line who shall be assessed for the cost of construction shall be notified in writing by the department at least 20 days prior to the hearing. The sewer system provider shall comply with the intent of this section by addressing all notices to the owners listed on the latest ad valorem tax digest at the addresses indicated. The records of the sewer system provider showing evidence of the mailing of the notices shall be prima facie evidence, and failure of the owner of any property concerned to receive a notice shall in no way affect the validity of the proceedings or the assessment. The purpose of this written notice is to furnish the owner with an additional statement of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-180, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-294. Conduct of hearing.
At the hearing provided for in this division, any person whose property or interests are affected by the proposed sanitary sewer may appear before the governing authority either in person or through an agent or attorney. All evidence relevant to the question, whether in support or in objection, may be presented. The decision of the governing authority with respect to the approval or rejection of the proposed sanitary sewer shall be final and conclusive. Any decision by the governing authority in favor of the construction shall indicate a public need for the sanitary sewer, and this shall make all matters pertaining to the construction of the sanitary sewer and the assessment of costs against the abutting property owners legal and binding. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-181, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-295. Procedure after plans and specifications received.
When the sewer system provider has received plans, specifications and necessary engineering data, it shall determine the names of all property owners affected and procure the necessary right-of-way for construction of the sanitary sewer line as specified. Before final approval of any plans, the sewer system provider must also ensure that sufficient stub-out connections are designated to adequately serve the territory affected. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-182, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-296. Performance of construction.
All sanitary sewers shall be constructed by the sewer system provider or by their designated contractors. All sanitary sewer construction performed by a private contractor shall be guaranteed against defects in contractor-supplied material and workmanship for a minimum period of one year from the final inspection date. Construction is under the supervision of the sewer system provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-183, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-297. Assessments generally.
(a)	After the construction of a sanitary sewer line has been completed, the department shall make up an assessment roll properly describing the sanitary sewer line and containing the names of all owners of abutting property. Each owner's property abutting the sanitary sewer shall be correctly described as it pertains to the construction. The cost of the sanitary sewer shall then be shared among the various property owners on a prorated basis depending on the number of linear feet each has abutting the sanitary sewer line. The actual assessment shall be calculated using a value in dollars and cents per linear foot based on the average cost for construction of all petitioned sanitary sewer lines in the sewer system provider's service area in the previous year. Assessment rates shall be approved by the sewer system provider on an annual basis. 
(b)	The minimum assessment shall be for 65 feet, whether or not a sanitary sewer line has to extend that distance to service a property or not. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-184, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-298. Assessment computations; double-frontage lots, owners previously assessed, residences not totally served by gravity sewer.
(a)	Whenever a tract of land abuts a sanitary sewer line on both the front and the rear, and the tract of land cannot be subdivided into two or more separate lots fronting each of the abutting sewers, then the property shall be assessed only for the side with the greater frontage. 
(b)	Several considerations shall be made before determining whether or not a tract of land can be subdivided. If the topography of the land makes it impractical to construct a building on one of the lots, or to provide sanitary sewer service to one of the lots, then the tract of land is not suitable for subdivision. 
(c)	Property owners who have contributed to the cost of existing sanitary sewers, whether by private contract, the original subdivisions or previous assessment, shall be exempted from current assessment. However, if property owners or previous owners did not contribute to the construction cost of existing sanitary sewers, they shall be assessed in the same manner as any other abutting property owner. 
(d)	When all floor levels of a residential unit are not served by the sewer by gravity, then the property will be assessed a percentage of the total assessment equal to a percentage of the total number of fixtures in a house or building that are actually served by the sewer main by gravity. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-185, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-299. Assessment of corner property.
Corner property shall be assessed under this division in the following manner: 
(1)	Where the sanitary sewer abuts the property only on the front, the property shall be assessed for the amount of frontage. 
(2)	Where the sanitary sewer abuts the property on both the front and side, the property shall be assessed for the frontage; the first 150 feet of the side abutting shall be exempted from assessment; the next 100 feet of the side abutting shall be subject to assessment; and the remainder of the side abutting beyond 250 feet shall be treated as outfall sewer and not assessed. 
(3)	Where the sanitary sewer abuts the property on the side only, the property shall be assessed for the frontage; the first 150 feet abutting on the sides shall be exempted; the next 100 feet of the sides abutting shall be subject to assessment; and the remainder of the side abutting beyond 250 feet shall be treated as outfall sewer and not assessed. 
(4)	Where the sanitary sewer abuts property that is pie-shaped or has an unusual frontage and that frontage is greater than the largest normal-shaped and assessed property, the property will be assessed for the same number of front feet as the largest, normal-shaped assessable property in the petitioned area. The sewer system provider shall have the responsibility for determining what properties are to be considered pie-shaped or unusual. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-186, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-300. Outfall sewers.
(a)	In this section, the term "outfall sewer" means a section of sanitary sewer line, either in a public street or across private property, which normally does not provide direct service to the abutting property. Usually the outfall sewer is a section of a trunk sewer providing service to several street sanitary sewers serving properties and its cost is not included in the assessment rate. However, when an outfall does provide direct service to the abutting property, the cost of constructing the outfall shall be assessed against the abutting property owners. 
(b)	Property owners desiring connection to outfall sewers may do so with concurrence of the director and shall pay an assessment based on the current year linear foot rate prior to their obtaining a sewer connection permit. 
(c)	Exceptions to the provisions of this section may be granted by the department upon application. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-187, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-301. Payment of assessments.
Whenever a sanitary sewer line has been constructed in accordance with this division and the cost thereof has been assessed against the benefiting property, then the respective owners shall be notified of the assessment and they shall be required to pay in cash, within 60 days, to the finance department, the amount of the assessment. If the amount of the assessment causes a financial burden on the owner, then the owner may extend the assessment and pay it in annual installments. However, no less than one-fifth of the total assessment shall be paid within 60 days after notification. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-188, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-302. Extension of payments.
If the property owner requires an extension in the payment of an assessment under this division, then the owner must execute in writing an extension agreement with the sewer system provider stating that the owner shall pay a 20 percent down payment and, in a maximum of four equal annual installments, the amount of the assessment, less the cash down payment put forth on the due date. The extension agreement must be executed on or before the due date of the assessment. In the agreement, the owner must acknowledge the fact that throughout, the extension remains legal and valid, and all liens remain in force. The unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear interest at a rate specified by the Code. Interest charges shall be assessed from the due date and shall be included in the installments. The agreement shall be negotiable in form, and the sewer system provider shall reserve the right to transfer or assign it to third parties. If ever the owner defaults in the payment of any installment, then the entire assessment shall immediately become due and payable. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-189, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-303. Executions for failure to pay.
Should the owner of any property against which a sanitary sewer assessment has been levied fail to execute a payment extension agreement as provided in this article, or fail to pay the assessment in cash within 60 days, or fail to pay the remainder of the assessment after default on extension, then an execution shall be issued in rem against the property and in personam against the owner in the name of the sewer system provider. The execution shall be recorded on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the superior court and shall include sums to cover principal, interest and administrative costs. All adjoining property owned by the same party shall be covered in the execution. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-190, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-304. Assessments to be liens.
All assessments against property and the owners thereof for sanitary sewer construction shall be liens upon the property from the date the resolution authorizing is adopted. All assessments shall be posted in an improvement docket and kept on file in the finance department. Properties assessed shall be described in the docket in a manner sufficient to identify them with the section of the sanitary sewer they abut. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-191, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-305. Assessments after previous exemptions.
(a)	The department may grant property abutting sanitary sewer lines an exemption from assessment. Often this occurs when the sewer system provider, by negotiating an easement, uses private property in the laying of a sanitary sewer line. Property thus exempted can be connected to the sewerage system at any future date without being liable for assessment. 
(b)	If, however, the property was exempted for another reason, such as the elevation of the property, and it is improved at a later date to a condition whereby sanitary sewer service can be attained and is required, then, if this occurs within 25 years after the completion of the sanitary sewer, the property is subject to assessment under the provisions of this division. If the improvement occurs more than 25 years after construction, the property may not be assessed. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-192, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-306. Service connections.
(a)	After sanitary sewer lines have been constructed and tied into the sewerage system, each abutting property owner who has contributed to the costs of construction through assessment may desire a service connection. To make such a connection, the property owner shall hire, at the owner's expense, a plumber or contractor to lay pipe from the building drain to the stub-out provided. Before this service line can be connected to the sanitary sewer, the owner shall secure a permit from the sewer system provider by paying a plumbing fee and a sewer tap fee. If the service line then passes the inspection criteria of the sewer system provider, the owner may have it connected into the sewerage system. 
(b)	When no stub-out or other means of connection is provided so as to service the building drain, it shall be the responsibility of the sewer system provider to provide a stub-out for the property owner at no cost if the property owners, present or past, have contributed to the cost of the existing sewer either by the original subdivision or by assessment. 
(c)	When a property owner desires connection to the sewerage system after construction of the sanitary sewer line, and no owner of the property has contributed to the costs of constructing the sanitary sewer line, the owner must pay a proportionate cost of construction based on the current year linear foot rate prior to obtaining a sewer connection permit. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-193, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-307—25-330. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 25-331. Applications for building sewer permits.
Applications for building sewer permits shall be supplemented by plans, specifications and other information considered pertinent to the issuance of a permit. At the time the application is filed, a plumbing and inspection fee in an amount established by action of the governing authority shall be paid to the sewer system provider. Installations and their respective tapping fees, as set by the governing authority, shall be placed in one of two categories, residential or nonresidential. Proposed nonresidential discharges which meet the definition of significant industrial user shall also obtain a wastewater discharge permit as described in division 4 of this article. Nonresidential development has the option of requesting a recalculation of the tap fee based on actual water consumption after the first year of occupancy in a new building. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-211, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-332. Separate building sewer for each building.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. An exception is made where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sanitary sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway; then, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole system considered one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-212, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-333. Old building sewers in new buildings.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the sewer system provider, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-213, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-334. Location of building sewer and building drain.
Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the department, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which a building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sanitary sewer, sewage carried by this drain shall be lifted by an approved sewage ejector to a height to permit gravity flow. All sewage ejector installations shall be approved by the sewer system provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-214, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-335. Owner to bear installation, connection costs.
The owner shall bear all costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer. The owner shall compensate the city and/or sewer system provider for any loss or damage that may have occurred to the public sanitary sewer as a result of the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-215, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-336. Conformity to specifications.
The size, slope, alignment and materials used in constructing a building sewer; the methods used in excavating, placing of the pipe, and backfilling of the trench; and the testing of the pipe shall all conform to the specifications, guidelines and other applicable rules of the city and sewer system provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-216, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-337. Connection of building sewer into public sewer.
(a)	The connection of the building sewer into the public sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements and regulations of the sewer system provider. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from specified procedures must be approved in writing by the department before installation. 
(b)	An applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sanitary sewer. Service shall not be instituted until the plumbing fee and sewer tap fee are paid and the connection is approved. Excavations necessary for the accomplishment of the connection shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights, so as to protect the public from hazard. All excavations greater than five feet deep shall be covered when excavation is not being conducted. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored at the owner's expense, in compliance with city specifications. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-217, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-338. Connection of surface runoff and groundwater sources to public sewer.
Connection, directly or indirectly, of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains or other sources of surface runoff is not permitted to a building drain or building sewer connected to a public sanitary sewer. Existing connections of these items to a building sewer shall be disconnected when the building sewer is connected to the public sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-218, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-339. Connecting to public sewer without paying fees or obtaining permit.
It is unlawful to connect to the public sanitary sewer without payment of the prescribed fee and without a permit. If such a sewer connection is made, a current sewer tap fee, the fee at the time the connection was discovered, will be assessed; back sewer use charges will be made and interest at the rate specified in the Code will be charged. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-219, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-340. Maintenance and repair responsibility for building sewer service connections to public sanitary sewer system.
The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of building sewer service connections to the public sanitary sewer system on private property. The sewer system provider shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of building sewer service connections within city street rights-of-way and sanitary sewer easements. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-220, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-341—25-368. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS
Sec. 25-369. Wastewater discharge permit required.
All significant industrial users connected to, proposing to connect to or otherwise contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit. Proposed new significant users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connection to the sewer system and shall obtain such permit prior to contributing to the system. 
(1)	The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(2)	The director may deny permission to discharge or condition discharges from new, increased or significantly changed contributions from any industrial user, significant or otherwise, located within the county or in outside jurisdictions discharging to the county's POTW. 
(3)	Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this division. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements, or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-231, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-370. Application.
Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the department an application in the form prescribed and furnished by the sewer system provider and accompanied by a fee in the amount established by action of the sewer system provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-232, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-371. Compliance with all applicable regulations.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city or sewer system provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-233, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-372. Permit contents.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)	Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.	A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed three years; 
b.	A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable, except as defined in section 25-373; 
c.	Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.	Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state or local law; 
e.	A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law. 
(2)	Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
a.	Limits on the rate of discharge, time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.	Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.	Requirements for the development and implementation of accidental discharge/slug control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine discharges; 
d.	Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.	Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
f.	A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
g.	Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-234, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-373. Expiration and renewal.
(a)	Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 120 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. If no new local, state or federal pretreatment requirements are impending on the user and the user has had no violation of the existing permit, the sewer system provider shall renew the permit for a time period at least equal to the existing permit. All other expiring permits shall be reviewed and revised or renewed as determined by the director. Should a timely applied for permit expire before issuance of a new permit by the sewer system provider, the existing permit shall continue in force until the new permit is issued by the sewer system provider. 
(b)	Discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation and normally are not transferable to any succeeding user or the current user for a new operation. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)	States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)	Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)	Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-235, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-374. Reporting requirements.
(a)	Baseline monitoring reports.
(1)	Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information in subsection (a)(2) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)	Users described in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall submit the following information: 
a.	Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.	Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.	Description of operations. Brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by the user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated process. 
d.	Flow measurement. The measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams. 
e.	Measurement of pollutants.
1.	The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.	The results of sampling and analyses identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 25-422. 
3.	Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 25-422. 
f.	Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and. requirements. 
g.	Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional treatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
h.	Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 25-375. 
(b)	Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 25-374: 
(1)	The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards; 
(2)	No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)	The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the compliance schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; 
(4)	All compliance schedule progress reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 25-375; and 
(5)	In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(c)	Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the following information: flow measurements; measurement of pollutants; and the certification statement, as described in section 25-374, the baseline monitoring report. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 25-375. 
(d)	Discharge monitoring reports (self-monitoring reports). All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director and specified in the wastewater discharge permit but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report on the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards, and the measured daily flows for the reporting period. All discharge monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 25-375. 
(1)	All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(2)	If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in this division, the results of the additional monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)	Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director's designee as identified in the wastewater discharge permit within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analyses and submit the results of the repeated testing to the director within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the department monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the department samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of that sampling. 
(f)	Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change. 
(1)	The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 25-370. 
(2)	The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 25-369 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 25-384 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)	For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-236, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-375. Signatories and certification.
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports (section 25-374) must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-237, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-376. Record keeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, time of sampling and the name of the persons taking the samples; the dates the analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city or county, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-238, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-377. Appeals.
(a)	Any user may appeal an altered or new permit condition or alleged violation of a current permit condition to the department. Such appeal must be received within 30 work days. The department shall schedule an appeal review meeting within 30 days to discuss the appealed condition of this division or wastewater discharge permit and corrective or remedial action to be taken. 
(b)	If the user and the department can agree to appropriate corrective remedial or preventive measures, such measures and a reasonable compliance schedule shall be incorporated as a supplemental condition of the user's wastewater discharge permit. If an agreement is not reached through the conciliation process, the department shall refer the appeal to the governing authority and the governing authority shall review the appeal and adjudge the dispute. The sewer system provider shall then institute such actions as deemed advisable to ensure the user's compliance with the provisions of this division or other laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-239, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-378. Public participation and access to records.
(a)	The city and sewer system provider shall comply with the regulations for public participation as applicable under federal, state or local law. 
(b)	Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, monitoring programs and from the sewer system provider's inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law, or that such information is otherwise protected from disclosure under applicable federal or state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public. It shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving persons furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-240, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-379. Federal limits supersede local limits.
Upon the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard for a particular industrial subcategory, the national standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The sewer system provider shall notify all affected significant industrial users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-241, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-380. Significant noncompliance.
The director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" means: 
(1)	Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)	Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD; TSS; fats, oils and grease; and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)	Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)	Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of his emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)	Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)	Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)	Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)	Any other violations which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-242, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-381. Penalties and enforcement.
(a)	Upon determination that a violation of this article has occurred, the director shall serve upon that discharger a written notice of violation. Within 15 days of receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific actions, shall be submitted by the violator to the department. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)	The director may order a discharger which has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of this article to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served by registered or certified mail, or by personal service on the user or the authorized representative of the user. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the discharger. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the discharger. 
(c)	When the director finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of this division or that the discharger's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the discharger directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the discharger to: 
(1)	Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)	Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation and to prevent recurrence of the violation. 
Each day of violation of a cease and desist order, after notice thereof, shall constitute a violation of this division, and shall constitute a separate violation of this division, subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment, or both, set forth in section 1-11. 
(d)	Violation of the provisions of this article constitutes an infraction subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day per violation, imprisonment in jail for a term not exceeding 30 days, or by labor on the work gang for 60 days for any single offense, in accordance with section 1-11. The city or their authorized agents may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this division or to correct violations of this division. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. 
(e)	When the director finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, the director may petition the courts for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the requirements imposed by this article on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the discharger to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking other action against a discharger. 
(f)	The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the county, including, but not limited to, containment, cleanup, injury, death and other. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-243, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-382. Permit revocation.
The director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)	Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)	Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to this article; 
(3)	Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or any other required reporting; 
(4)	Falsifying self monitoring reports or other required reporting; 
(5)	Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)	Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)	Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)	Failure to pay fines; 
(9)	Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)	Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)	Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)	Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; 
(13)	Change of any condition that requires either temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge; or 
(14)	Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-244, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-383. Permit modification.
The director may modify any permit in whole or in part during its term for cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter; 
(2)	Engaging in any act that would constitute basis for revocation of the permit; 
(3)	For purpose of incorporating any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standard or requirements; 
(4)	For purpose of addressing significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(5)	Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(6)	Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)	Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)	To correct clerical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)	Changing any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-245, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-384. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
(a)	Upset.
(1)	For the purposes of this section, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)	An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section are met. 
(3)	A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.	An upset occurred and the user can identify the causes of the upset; 
b.	The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.	The user has submitted the following information to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.	A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.	The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.	Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance; 
d.	In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof; 
e.	Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards; and 
f.	Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)	Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 25-414(a) or the specific prohibitions in section 25-414(b)(3) through (7) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)	A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)	No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the county was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permits, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)	Bypass.
(1)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (c), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)	A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (c)(3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)	Prior notice. 
a.	If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
b.	A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)	Certain conditions resulting in exemption from enforcement action. 
a.	Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
1.	Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
2.	There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
3.	The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
b.	The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (c)(4)a of this section. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-246, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-385—25-411. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. DISCHARGE REGULATIONS
Sec. 25-412. Discharge of prohibited waters.
Discharge to a public sanitary sewer of stormwater, surface runoff or groundwater is prohibited. These waters shall be discharged to sewers specifically designated as storm sewers, combined sewers, or to an outlet approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-251, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-413. Unauthorized tampering or use of sewers, appurtenances.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or open, use, alter or disturb any public sanitary sewer or appurtenance without first obtaining a written permit from the department. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-252, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-414. Prohibited substances, wastes or materials.
(a)	General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)	Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater: 
(1)	Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases, or any other pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-up flash point of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)	Wastewater having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 11.5 or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to sewerage or harm to personnel. 
(3)	Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or any water wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in a quantity sufficient to interfere with any sewerage or sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a public nuisance, whether these wastes cause problems independently or via action with other substances. 
(4)	Solids or viscous liquids in quantities, types or sizes which will cause either flow obstruction in the sewer system or interference with the operation of the POTW (size may not be greater than one-half inch in any dimension). 
(5)	Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. 
(6)	Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(7)	Wastes or pollutants which have been classified as hazardous waste or hazardous materials in accordance with 40 CFR 261. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-253, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-415. Limits set on certain substances, materials and wastes.
(a)	Discharge of any of the following water substances, wastes, or materials into a public sanitary sewer in excess of the stated limits and/or conditions is prohibited: 
(1)	Liquid or water vapor having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit, or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Celsius. 
(2)	Waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils of a petroleum or mineral base, in a concentration greater than 100 milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(3)	Substances which become solids or very viscous liquids at temperatures greater than 32 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(4)	Garbage that has been improperly shredded (any dimension greater than one-half inch). 
(5)	Waters or wastes containing the contaminants listed at a concentration greater than the limits set. This restriction includes, but is not limited to, discharges by any user of the collection and treatment system such that specific pollutants discharged to the county sanitary sewer system do not exceed concentrations specified below. The concentration limits on discharges by any user, listed below, may be used as a guide in design and plant control, but may be altered by the governing authority in the event of a discharge causing upset, interference or pass through at the POTW or having a deleterious effect upon any other aspect of public welfare, either alone or in combination with other discharges: 
a.	Local discharge limits for all industrial users maximum daily concentration (as measured in discharges from manufacturing processes only, excluding domestic wastes or unpolluted discharges): 


b.	Local discharge limits for industrial users discharging to the City of Atlanta's RM Clayton WPCP maximum daily concentration (as measured in discharges from manufacturing processes only, excluding domestic waste or unpolluted discharges): 


(6)	Waters or wastes containing taste- or odor-producing contaminants in such quantities that, after treatment of sewage, these contaminants impart their tastes or odors to receiving waters. 
(7)	Waters or wastes colored by dye or other solutions to such a degree that the color is not removed by treatment. 
(8)	Wastes containing substances emitting radiation greater than 1,000 picocuries per liter (pCi/l) for gross beta. 
(9)	Any other contaminant which the director deems harmful to the operation or efficiency of sewage treatment plants, the utilization or disposal of sludges, or to the health and welfare of the residents of the county. 
(10)	Waters or wastes containing any compound found to be toxic, in concentrations exceeding such acceptable limits as have been or shall be defined by the Environmental Protection Agency. This limitation includes compounds defined by the Environmental Protection Agency as priority pollutants pursuant to 40 CFR 403. 
(b)	Ground paper products shall be prohibited from being discharged into the public sewer system. 
(c)	All industrial users shall be required to meet pretreatment standards as set forth in 40 CFR 403, entitled "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution." The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR 405—471 are incorporated. 
(d)	The city or sewer system provider may establish by ordinance, or the director may establish in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards for requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-254, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-416. Discharges which affect effluent quality from sewage treatment plants.
Discharges of materials or substances which would cause interference, upset and/or pass-through in the POTW, whether alone or in combination with other substances and discharges, are prohibited. Included without limitation in this category are: 
(1)	Slug concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as lime slurries). 
(2)	Slug concentrations of inert dissolved solids (such as sodium chloride). 
(3)	Slug concentrations of colored wastes (such as dyes and tanning solutions). 
(4)	Slug concentrations of materials high in BOD or COD. 
(5)	Slug concentrations of ammonia or organic nitrogen compounds. 
(6)	Slug concentrations of phosphorus compounds. 
(7)	Other wastes not amenable to treatment. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-255, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-417. Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
(a)	At least once every two years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)	Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)	Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)	Procedures for immediately notifying the director or his designee of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 25-423; 
(4)	Procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(b)	Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this division shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. Pollutants, raw materials, products, processed materials or waste materials shall not be stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the storm drain or cause a contaminated discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-256, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-418. Separators and interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand separators shall be provided when wastes containing more than 100 mg/l of fat, oil, grease or sand are discharged. Separators shall also be provided for any other substance in the wastes which becomes viscous or solidifies at a temperature above 32 degrees Fahrenheit. All interceptors or separators shall be approved in writing by the county and shall be located for easy inspection. All expenses of installation and operation shall be borne by the owner. Interceptors and separators shall not be required for private living quarters. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-257, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-419. Industrial discharges and surcharges.
(a)	Industrial contributors to the public sanitary sewer system shall be required to pay a sewer rate surcharge based upon the concentration of total suspended solids (TSS), five-day BOD, ammonia and/or total phosphorus in their effluents. Industrial dischargers whose wastes contain greater than 250 mg/l of either five-day BOD and/or total suspended solids, 30 mg/l ammonia, or ten mg/l total phosphorus shall pay the surcharge in an amount set by the sewer system provider. 
(b)	If values for any constituent exceed two times the minimum surcharge concentration (i.e., 500 mg/l TSS) then the director may, if determined that these wastes adversely affect the POTW, require the industrial user to install pretreatment before discharging wastes to the public sanitary sewer system. This pretreatment must reduce the concentration of the wastes by treatment/removal of the excess constituent to the point where it no longer harms the POTW, and the values for all constituents are less than two times the minimum surcharge concentration. 
(c)	Periodic determination of the values for constituents subject to surcharge shall be made on composite samples of industrial effluents by personnel of the sewer system provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-258, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-420. Discharges requiring pretreatment.
The sewer system provider may require pretreatment of wastewater to an acceptable condition before discharge to the public sanitary sewer system when wastewaters contain the substances or possess the characteristics of prohibited or limited discharges. Pretreatment may also be required if these wastewaters cause upset, interference or pass through at the POTW or have a deleterious effect upon any other aspect of public welfare, either alone or in combination with other discharges. In addition to lowering the concentrations of substances to an acceptable level through pretreatment or altering the characteristics of a wastewater, the sewer system provider may require additional controls before discharge to the public sanitary sewer system. In particular, quantities or rates of discharge shall be altered so that the discharge becomes more compatible with the sewer system. Expenses incurred in the installation and operation of these controls shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-259, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-421. Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-260, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-422. Measurements, tests and analyses, and sample collection.
(a)	Any measurements, tests, analyses, sample types, sample containers and/or holding times to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with procedures and specifications as set forth in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(b)	Analyses shall be determined at the control manhole, or upon a suitable sample taken at the control manhole. If no control manhole is available on the building sewer, the control manhole shall be considered the nearest downstream manhole to which the building sewer is directly connected. When the director deems it necessary, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole on the building sewer to facilitate observation and sampling of wastes. This manhole, when required, shall be accessible, safely located, and constructed at the owner's expense in accordance with county specifications. 
(c)	Except as indicated in subsection (d) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite sampling techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(d)	Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-261, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-423. Accidental spills or drains.
(a)	In the case of accidental spills, loss to the drains of any deleterious material or substances, discharges of a non-routine nature, non-customary batch discharges or slug loads, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the sewer system provider of the incident. This notification shall include the time of occurrence, location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume if known and corrective actions taken by the user. The user shall take all possible actions to prevent a spill, and should a spill occur, shall take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the incident. Industrial users which store or otherwise handle toxic, hazardous or flammable materials must have an accidental discharge/slug control plan in place to prevent the discharge, accidental or otherwise, of the materials to the sewer system. 
(b)	Within five days following such discharge, the user shall submit a detailed written report, unless waived by the director, describing the causes of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar occurrences in the future. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this division. 
(c)	A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-262, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-424. Discharge of trucked or hauled wastes.
(a)	Discharge to any public sanitary sewer, appurtenance, or treatment facility of pumped, trucked or hauled wastes from commercial or industrial sources is prohibited. This ban specifically includes the disposal of greases and other grease trap-related wastes from food establishments. 
(b)	Discharge of domestic septage is allowable only at the county's authorized septic tank disposal site, located at the Snapfinger Creek Water Pollution Control Plant, in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)	Septic tank pumping companies must register with the county health department, division of environmental health; have their trucks inspected by that agency; and be issued a permit to operate. 
(2)	Discharge fees shall be payable by coupons, obtained at the county division of revenue and license administration, and presented to the operator at the disposal site. Fees shall be as established by action of the board of commissioners. 
(3)	A manifest form must be completed on every septic tank pumped. Copies of the manifests for the septage to be discharged must be presented to the operator at the disposal site. The operator shall have the authority to deny approval for discharge to any loads not accompanied by manifests, due to discrepancies with the manifests, or other apparent problems with truck contents. 
(4)	Domestic septage shall be defined as the contents from septic tanks located at single-family residences, county school facilities, or the contents of portable toilets. 
(5)	Repeat and/or major violations of these regulations may result in the hauling company being barred from the treatment facility and denied access to disposal in the county's system, in addition to the other fines and penalties cited in this section. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-263, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-425. Emergency suspensions.
The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend the user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)	Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the order, sewer connection, and/or termination of water supply, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed. 
(2)	A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement to the director, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-264, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-426—25-448. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. FATS, OILS AND GREASES
Sec. 25-449. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to water quality shall be as defined in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to construction shall be as defined in this Code and in the latest adopted applicable editions of the state codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to state law. 
20 percent rule means the requirement for FOG interceptors to be maintained such that the combined FOG solids accumulation does not exceed 20 percent of the design hydraulic capacity of the FOG interceptor. 
Architectural or historical restrictions means a building or structure in the city that is 100 years or older and has special historical or esthetic interest or value. 
Backflow means a reversal of normal flow in a system caused by a negative pressure (vacuum or partial vacuum) in the supply piping or other condition that reverses the normal direction of flow. 
Baffle means a retention wall three-quarters the length of the chamber nearer to the outlet. 
Best management practices means a schedule of activities, a prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of fats, oils, and greases into the sewer system. These practices may vary by site, but produce the same reductions in fats, oils, and greases in the sewer system. 
Change in operations means any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures of a food service establishment. 
Compliance inspector means a person authorized by the city to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and/or disposal facilities. 
Director means the director or designee of the sewer system provider. 
Extreme economic hardship means a cost to comply with the requirements of these regulations that exceeds $50,000.00. 
Fats, oils, and greases (FOG) means any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the food preparation process, that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies or may solidify with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
Fixtures means a pot sink, pre-rinse sink, vegetable sink, meat sink, mop sink, soup kettles, work stations, floor drains, automatic hood wash units, garbage disposals, trash compactors, dishwashers, and any other similarly functioning plumbing fixtures. 
Flow means volume of wastewater moving in a certain direction. 
Flow control device means a mechanism installed to control flow of hydraulic levels of FOG into an interceptor. 
FOG means fats, oils, and greases. 
FOG control program means to reduce and/or control the discharge of fats, oils, and grease into the sewer system by educating and regulating food service establishments located in the city or establishments located outside the city but which discharge FOG. 
FOG control program manager means the individual designated by the city to administer the FOG control program. 
FOG interceptor means a multi-compartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located underground between a food service establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective. 
FOG manifest means a document that the state-permitted transporter must provide to the FOG generator as proof of services rendered. 
FOG wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued by the county authorizing the food service establishment or generator to discharge wastewater into the county's facilities or into the sewer system. 
Food service establishment (FSE) means any person who prepares and/or packages food or beverage for sale or consumption, on or off site, with the exception of private residences so long as the private residence is not used to prepare or package food or beverage for sale. Food service establishments include, but are not limited to, food courts; food manufacturers; food packagers; restaurants; catering services; bars/taverns; cafeterias; soda fountains; institutions, both public and private; mobile food vehicles (coach); wing trailers; diners; grocery stores; bakeries; coffee shops; ice cream shops; lounges; hospitals; hotels; nursing homes; churches; schools; daycare center; and all other food service establishments not listed in this definition, either fixed or mobile, as are or may hereafter be recognized by the health department and/or the state department of agriculture. 
Fresh air system/fixtures means a system that provides free circulation of air, which will prevent contamination from back flow or back siphonage (e.g., compartment sinks, dishwashers, floor drains, meat sinks, vegetable sinks, work stations, and mop sinks). 
Generator means any person including those outside the jurisdictional limits of the City of Brookhaven who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into sewers within the city boundaries. 
Grease trap means an inside mechanism no less than 100 pounds and no more than 300 pounds in size, with baffle and flow control installed before the master trap. 
Hot flushing means a prohibited situation that occurs when the FOG interceptor is too close to a hot-water-using device so the water does not cool sufficiently in the interceptor to allow the FOG to coagulate and float to the top and FOG is instead carried out to the sewer system. 
Limited food preparation establishment means an establishment that is engaged only in reheating or serving of ready-to-eat food products and, as a result, discharges wastewater containing less than 100 mg/l of FOG per operating business day. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
New construction means any structure, planned or under construction, where a sewer connection permit is required by law or regulation but has not been issued. 
Nonhazardous manifest means a receipt that is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing of FOG, liquids, or other wastes as required. 
Plumbing Drainage Institute rating means interceptors that are tested, rated, and certified in conformance with Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute—G101 by the Plumbing and Drainage Institute. 
Regulatory agencies means those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the city including, but not limited to: the United States Environmental Protection Agency, region IV, Georgia and Washington, D.C. (EPA); the state department of natural resources (DNR); the state division of public health; the state environmental protection division (EPD); DeKalb County; or any regulatory agency or body as may be established by federal, state, or local law. 
Remodeling or remodeled means a physical change or operational change in a structure that requires an issuance of or revision to a business license or a building permit. 
Septic tank means a hollow chambered tank without a baffle, T's, and flow control to restrict FOG from entering the county's sewer system. 
Sewer system means as defined in section 25-257 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
Shovel inspection means a FOG compliance inspector who uses a shovel to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
Sludge means any solid, semisolid or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
Sludge judge inspection means a test in which the FOG compliance inspector uses an instrument, usually a clear hollow plastic tube, to pull and measure a core sample from the FOG interceptor to determine its condition. 
Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute—G101 means a comprehensive engineering and testing program developed to establish flow rates and FOG holding capacity for uniform rating of FOG interceptors. 
State permitted transporter means a transporter as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
Total solids means the sum of suspended and dissolved solids within a sample. 
Visual inspection means an in-person observation by a FOG compliance inspector to determine if a shovel inspection and/or a sludge judge inspection is necessary to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, or gaseous, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature intended for disposal. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, and bacteriological parameters, including volume and flow rate, and such other parameters that serve to define, classify, or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.1, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-450. Purpose, scope, and policy.
(a)	These regulations are designed to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the public sewer system while preventing blockages and overflows of sewer system resulting from discharges of FOG into the public sewer system and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for all facilities emitting FOG. 
(b)	By enactment of these regulations, the city intends to exercise its authority over sizing, location, maintenance, and material of grease traps and/or interceptors within the city. 
(c)	The provisions of these regulations shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all wastewater or waste containing FOG discharged into the public sewer system. 
(d)	These regulations establish quantity and quality standards on all wastewater and/or waste discharges containing FOG; which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer system causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of sanitary sewer overflows and blockages. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.2, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-451. Transporters of nonhazardous commercial waste.
O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq., sets forth a permitting scheme for transporters of commercial waste and provides a regulatory method for the clean and sanitary removal of commercial waste. O.C.G.A. § 12-15-23 specifically authorizes cities to enforce compliance with the provisions of the state law described in this section. O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq., as currently enacted and as may hereinafter be amended, is therefore adopted by reference as if set out fully in this section. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.3, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-452. Best management practices.
(a)	All persons disposing of FOG shall be required to properly dispose of FOG using all of the following best management practices: 
(1)	Dispose of FOG in covered collection containers; 
(2)	Place food scraps from dishes into trash cans and garbage bags and dispose of properly; 
(3)	Avoid disposing of food scraps in garbage disposers to help maintain interceptor volume; 
(4)	Allow FOG to cool first before it is skimmed, scraped, or wiped off of all preparation and servicing surfaces; 
(5)	Prewash dishes and pans with cold water before putting them in the dishwasher; 
(6)	Cover the kitchen sink drain with screening and empty debris into the garbage as needed; 
(7)	Cover the floor drain with a fine screen and empty into the garbage can as needed; and 
(8)	Recycle used fryer oil. 
(b)	All persons disposing of FOG shall not use any of the following practices when disposing of FOG: 
(1)	Pouring FOG down the drain; 
(2)	Putting food scraps down the drain; or 
(3)	Running hot water over dishes, pans, fryers, woks, and griddles to rinse FOG down the drain (also known as hot flush). 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.4, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-453. Requirements for interceptor and specific plumbing connections.
The following requirements shall apply to interceptors and specific plumbing connections: 
(1)	All food service establishments shall only introduce pretreated wastewater acceptable to the sewer system provider, under the requirements and standards established herein before discharging, directly or indirectly, into any public sewer system. 
(2)	No more than 100 mg/l of FOG shall be discharged per operating business day. The FOG generator shall bear all of the expense of proving compliance with the 100 mg/l threshold. 
(3)	Any food service establishment required to provide FOG pretreatment shall install, operate, and maintain an appropriately designed and adequately sized FOG interceptor that has been approved by the director or designee. 
(4)	The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136. 
(5)	FOG interceptors shall be connected to the food service establishment's lateral sewer line after all fixtures which may introduce FOG have been connected and shall have fresh air connected, as defined in these regulations. Fresh-air fixtures include, but are not limited to, sinks, dishwashers, garbage disposals, automatic hood wash units, floor drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixtures which have a potential to introduce FOG. Wastewater from sanitary sewer fixtures and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into the FOG interceptor. 
(6)	FOG interceptors shall not be connected to septic tanks. 
(7)	All food service establishments that have dumpster pad/trash compactor drains on site and are connected to the sewer system shall have a separate interceptor (no less than 1,000 gallons in size) installed and functioning at all times. The sloping area to the outside drain and the drain shall be covered either by the dumpster/compactor or a canopy to prevent inflow and infiltration of rainwater. 
(8)	Any drains that lead to the sewer system including, but not limited to, trench drains, enclosed dock drains, carwash drains, elevator drains, and other similar types of drains shall have an oil-water debris interceptor of no less than 1,000 gallons and no more than 3,000 gallons in capacity. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.5, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-454. FOG interceptor physical specifications/requirements.
(a)	All interior FOG interceptors shall: 
(1)	Be a minimum of 100 pounds in capacity as defined by the Plumbing Drainage Institute; 
(2)	Be made of corrosion-resistant coated metal; 
(3)	Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
(4)	Contain properly installed and functioning baffle walls and other flow control devices necessary to achieve the appropriate retention time; 
(5)	Have at least a 30-minute interior retention time before gray water is discharged into the sewer system; 
(6)	Tie all of the fresh air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
(7)	Have 15-foot distance between the FOG interceptor and the last fresh air fixture and have a proper flow control device; 
(8)	Have a temperature of discharge entering the interior FOG interceptor that does not exceed 140 degrees Fahrenheit; and 
(9)	Be Plumbing Drainage Institute rated, be accessible for inspection, and be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications by a licensed plumber and not a representative and/or an apprentice of the licensed plumber. 
(b)	All exterior FOG interceptors shall: 
(1)	Be a minimum of 1,000 gallons in capacity; 
(2)	Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
(3)	Be constructed of re-enforced materials suitable for load bearing and watertight to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
(4)	Be precast with a minimum of 3,000 psi concrete per applicable American Society for Testing and Materials standards with four to seven percent air entrapment; 
(5)	Have an invert elevation of the inlet between three inches to six inches above the invert elevation of the outlet; 
(6)	Contain a properly installed and functioning baffle wall and other flow control devices necessary to achieve an adequate time for FOG to properly separate but not to exceed 24 hours; 
(7)	Contain inlet and outlet Ts made of schedule 40 PVC piping and at a 90-degree angle with a minimum diameter of the inlet and outlet piping to be six inches; 
(8)	Include the outlet T six inches from the manhole cover; 
(9)	Include T piping of the inlet and outlet that is within 18 inches of the bottom and at least five inches above the static liquid level of the tank; 
(10)	Have the FOG interceptor set level on a consolidated, stable base so that no settling or tipping of the FOG interceptor can occur; 
(11)	Connect all of the fresh-air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
(12)	Have the outlet discharge line from the FOG interceptor directly connected to a sewer line tapped into the collection main; 
(13)	Have solid manhole covers to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
(14)	Have two or more manholes for entry to each chamber of hydraulic liquid mass; 
(15)	Be accessible for inspections and have no permanent or temporary structure or container placed directly over the FOG interceptor or installed in areas subject to traffic; and 
(16)	Be installed by a licensed plumber. 
(c)	The contents of any fryer-oil containers shall not be mixed with any other FOG interceptor waste or any other non-toxic or toxic substances. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.6, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-455. Maintenance requirements for new and existing FSEs.
(a)	Depth of FOG. The depth of FOG (floating and settled) in the FOG interceptor shall not be equal to or greater than 20 percent of the total operating depth of the interceptor. 
(b)	General requirements for FOG interceptors. In order to maintain FOG interceptors, all food service establishments shall remove the sludge, floating materials, solids, and wastewater, and shall scrape all excessive solids from the walls, floor, baffles, and all pipe work and shall pump interior and exterior FOG interceptors dry as set forth in these regulations and as required by the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(1)	FOG interceptors shall be kept free from any inflow/infiltration such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., as such inflow reduces the effectiveness of the FOG interceptor; thereby increasing the need for more frequent cleaning. 
(2)	To ensure that the FOG interceptor can be maintained properly, the FOG interceptor needs to be free from any obstruction that would hinder the maintenance, function, and inspection of the interceptor. 
(3)	A state permitted transporter shall perform all maintenance of FOG interceptors. All state permitted transporters working in the city shall have an active state waste transporter's permit and a county transporters permit in the manner and form set forth by O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq. Transporters working in the city are required to leave a copy of a nonhazardous waste manifest with the food service establishment. Maintenance schedules may vary based on individual circumstances to protect the sewer system. 
(4)	The FOG compliance inspector has the authority to change the FOG interceptors cleaning cycles for any FOG generator at any time. 
(5)	The discharge or introduction of any additives to the sewer system is unlawful and prohibited. The direct introduction of additives into the FOG interceptor is prohibited. Additives include but are not limited to biological agents such as enzymes, bacteria, and/or degreasing agents. 
(6)	The FOG generator shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the FOG interceptor waste by a state permitted waste transporter and maintenance of records of disposal as specified in this section. All waste removed from each FOG interceptor must be disposed of at an appropriate disposal facility designed to receive such waste. 
(7)	No FOG interceptor pumpage shall be discharged to the sewer system as otherwise prohibited in these regulations. 
(8)	Every FOG interceptor shall be required to have a state nonhazardous waste manifest. The state nonhazardous waste manifest must be complete with all information required by these regulations and state law. 
(9)	Mechanical FOG interceptors are prohibited. 
(c)	Exterior FOG interceptors. Maintenance of exterior FOG interceptors shall be performed at least once every 90 days. Skimming, decanting, and/or any reintroduction of water into exterior FOG interceptors shall not be allowed under any conditions. 
(d)	Interior FOG interceptors. Interior FOG interceptors maintenance shall be performed once every 30 days, and all of the fresh air and/or safe-way plumbing fixtures shall be connected. In-house cleaning of interior FOG interceptors is prohibited. To ensure proper FOG interceptor maintenance, interior FOG interceptors shall be free from any obstruction that would hinder the maintenance of the interceptor. Interior FOG interceptors shall be easily accessible with a minimum clearance of 36 inches. 
(e)	Interior and exterior FOG interceptor records. All food service establishments shall maintain records of the date and time of all cleaning and maintenance. Every FOG interceptor manifest shall be placed in a logbook, folder, or three-ring notebook. This book shall be made available on demand by the FOG compliance inspector during inspection. All records of at least three years shall be kept on site and available. These records shall include: 
(1)	A logbook of FOG interceptor and/or FOG control device cleaning and maintenance; 
(2)	A record of best management practices being implemented, including employee training; 
(3)	Copies of records and manifests of waste transporting interceptor contents; 
(4)	Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral sewer line; and 
(5)	Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the FOG interceptors. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.7, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-456. Notification of spills by the food service establishment.
(a)	In the event that any food service establishment is unable to comply with any permit condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the food service establishment has reasonable opportunity to know that his/its discharge shall exceed the discharge provisions of the FOG wastewater discharge permit or these regulations, the food service establishments shall immediately notify the FOG control program manager or designee by telephone at the number specified in the permit. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or sanitary sewer overflows, the food service establishment shall immediately notify the FOG control program manager or designee by telephone at the number specified in the permit and the director of the county health department or designee orally or by telephone at the published numbers for such departments. 
(b)	All food service establishments shall provide written notification of this oral or telephonic notification to the FOG control program manager at the address specified in the permit no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
(c)	Such notification shall not relieve a food service establishment of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor will such notification relieve a food service establishment from payment of any fees or imposition of any other liability which may be authorized by these regulations or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.8, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-457. FOG wastewater discharge permit—Required; issuance.
(a)	Food service establishments proposing to discharge or currently discharging wastewater that contains FOG into the public sewer system shall obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit annually or cease ongoing operation until such permit is obtained. In addition to any other penalties authorized by law, failure to obtain such a permit shall subject the food service establishment to the potential of the disconnection of water service, until such permit is obtained. 
(b)	FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of these regulations and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees established by the county. The city or its designee in accordance with these regulations and applicable law shall have the authority to enforce the conditions of FOG wastewater discharge permits. 
(c)	The FOG wastewater discharge permit shall be issued upon: 
(1)	Receipt of a complete application; 
(2)	Compliance with these regulations; 
(3)	Compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code; and 
(4)	The proper installation and maintenance of a FOG interceptor that complies with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
(d)	In the event that the food service establishment complies with the applicable provisions of these regulations, a permit will be issued or denied within 30 days of compliance with this section. If the permit is not issued or denied within the time frame specified herein, the permit shall be deemed issued and approved. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.9, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-458. Same—Application.
(a)	All food service establishments are required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit and shall complete and file with the sewer system provider prior to commencing or continuing discharges, an application for a wastewater discharge permit in a form prescribed by the sewer system provider along with any applicable fees. The applicant shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)	Name, address, telephone number, assessor's parcel numbers, description of the food service establishment, operation, cuisine, service activities, and, as applicable, clients using the applicant's services; 
(2)	Whichever is applicable, the name and address of any and all principals/owners/major shareholders of the food service establishment, articles of incorporation, most recent report of the secretary of state, and a copy of the owner's business license; 
(3)	Name and address of property owner or lessee and the property manager for the property where the food service establishment is located; and 
(4)	Any other information specified in the application form. 
(b)	Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, FOG control devices, FOG interceptors, or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation for evaluation. 
(c)	Other information related to the applicant's business operations and potential discharge may be requested to properly evaluate the permit application. 
(d)	After evaluation of the data furnished, the sewer system provider may issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in these regulations and as otherwise determined by the FOG control program manager to be appropriate to protect the public sewer system. 
(e)	The FOG wastewater discharge permit and application fee shall be paid by the applicant in an amount adopted by action of the governing authority. Payment of the application permit fee must be received by the sewer system provider at the time of filing the application for the permit. A food service establishment shall also pay any delinquent invoices in full prior to any permit renewal. 
(f)	An application shall not be considered complete until all the information required by this section is provided to the FOG control program manager or his designee. The FOG control program manager shall have 15 business days from receipt of such information to advise a food service establishment that an application is not complete. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.10, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-459. Same—Conditions.
The issuance of a FOG wastewater discharge permit may contain any of the following conditions or limits: 
(1)	Limits on discharge of FOG (100 mg/l), which may cause or contribute to sanitary sewer overflows and/or sewer blockages; 
(2)	Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of FOG interceptors and other FOG control devices; 
(3)	FOG interceptor maintenance frequency and schedule; 
(4)	Requirements for implementation of best management practices and installation of adequate FOG interceptor and/or FOG control device; 
(5)	Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of best management practices; 
(6)	Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and records, including waste hauling records and waste manifests; 
(7)	Requirements to self-monitor the discharge to the sewer system and periodically assess and report on the condition of the sewer lateral; 
(8)	Requirements for the food service establishment to construct operate and maintain, at its own expense, a FOG control devices and sampling facilities; 
(9)	Additional requirements as otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate by the FOG control program manager to protect the public sewer system or as specified by other regulatory agencies; and 
(10)	Other terms and conditions which may be reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.11, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-460. Same—Modification of terms and conditions.
(a)	The terms and conditions of an issued permit may be modified by the FOG control program manager if there is a change in: 
(1)	The generator's current or anticipated operating data; 
(2)	The sewer system provider's current or anticipated operating data; 
(3)	The requirements of regulatory agencies which affect the sewer system provider; or 
(4)	A determination by the FOG control program manager and his designee that such modification is required to comply with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)	The food service establishment may request a modification to the terms and conditions of an issued permit. The request shall be in writing stating the requested change and the reasons for the change. The FOG control program manager shall review the request, make a determination on the request, and respond in writing within 30 days of receipt of the request. 
(c)	The food service establishment shall be informed of any change in the permit limits, conditions, or requirements at least 45 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, not to exceed 45 days. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.12, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-461. Same—Permits for new and existing facilities, grandfathering, and effective date.
(a)	New facilities. Food service establishments which are newly proposed, constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated, shall be required to install a properly sized FOG interceptor according to the requirements set forth in these regulations and such FOG interceptors shall be permitted and installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the food service establishment. 
(b)	Existing facilities. The city and the sewer system provider require all existing food service establishments to install, operate, and maintain a FOG interceptor that complies with the requirements set forth in these regulations. All food service establishments shall repair or replace any noncompliant plumbing or the existing FOG interceptor within 90 days of written notification by the sewer system provider if any one or more of the following conditions exist or occur: 
(1)	The facility is found to produce any product that creates FOG as a byproduct; 
(2)	The facility does not have a FOG interceptor; 
(3)	The facility has an undersized, irreparable, improperly configured, or defective FOG interceptor; 
(4)	Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued; 
(5)	The existing facility is sold or undergoes a change of ownership or expansion; 
(6)	The existing facility does not have plumbing connection to a FOG interceptor in compliance with the requirements of the sewer system provider; or 
(7)	If a food service establishment changes its business name. 
(c)	Grandfathering. If an existing food service establishment is housed in a structure that because of its architectural or historical restrictions the owner will suffer extreme economic hardship in order to upgrade the existing FOG interceptor, then the establishment may keep the current FOG interceptor in place provided that all fresh-air fixtures must be tied into the current FOG interceptor, and the FOG interceptor must be at least 15 feet from the last fresh-air fixture. Additionally, the FOG interceptor must be cleaned every ten days by a state permitted transporter. In the event that any remodeling of such a food service establishment is undertaken or if the food service establishment changes ownership, then a FOG interceptor that complies with all applicable requirements of this Code shall be installed. 
(d)	Notification of planned changes. All food service establishments shall notify the FOG compliance manager at least 90 days in writing in advance prior to any change of ownership, facility expansion/remodeling, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. All food service establishments shall submit any information requested by the sewer system provider for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on the food service establishment's FOG discharge to the sewer system. 
(e)	Effective date. These regulations shall become effective immediately upon adoption for all new and existing food service establishments and subject to the written policy promulgated by the sewer system provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.13, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-462. Same—Duration and renewal.
FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be issued annually. At least 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit, the user shall apply for renewal of the permit in accordance with the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.14, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-463. Same—Exemption.
A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a food service establishment and is exempt from obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.15, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-464. Nontransferability of permits and fees.
(a)	FOG wastewater discharge permits issued under these regulations are for a specific food service establishment, for a specific operation, and create no vested rights. 
(b)	No permit holder shall assign, transfer, or sell any FOG wastewater discharge permit issued under these regulations nor use any such permit for or on any premises or for facilities or operations or discharges not expressly encompassed within the underlying permit. 
(c)	A permitting fee that covers the administrative costs of the sewer system provider for administering the FOG program shall be established by action of the governing authority and assessed to each facility subject to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.16, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-465. Payment of charges.
All fees established by these regulations are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. Accounts shall become delinquent if not paid within 30 days of the date of mailing, or if personally delivered, the date of delivery. Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after 90 days shall be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or immediate suspension of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.17, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-466. Inspections and authority to enforce regulations.
(a)	Authority to inspect. The compliance inspectors shall inspect food service establishments on both an unscheduled and unannounced basis or on a scheduled basis. All food service establishments may be inspected up to four times per year. Inspection of a FOG interceptor shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of FOG in an amount that would exceed the 20 percent rule. Inspection shall include all fixtures, equipment, food processing, and storage areas, and shall include a review of the processes that produce wastewater discharged from a facility through the FOG interceptor. Any deficiencies shall be noted, including but not to be limited to: 
(1)	Failure to report changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(2)	Failure to properly maintain the FOG interceptor; 
(3)	Failure to maintain logs, files, records, or access for inspection or monitoring activities; 
(4)	Failure to obtain or renew the FOG discharge permits in a timely manner; or 
(5)	Any other violations of these regulations or state law that requires correction by the food service establishment. 
(b)	Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of these regulations or where the FOG control program manager or designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the applicable provisions of this Code, the FOG control program manager or designee is authorized to enter the building, structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform any of the duties imposed by the applicable provisions of this Code. If such building, structure, or premises is occupied, the inspector shall present credentials to the occupant and shall request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure, or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the inspector shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law for entry. In the event of an emergency involving actual or imminent sanitary sewer overflow, the inspector may access adjoining businesses or properties that share a sewer system with a food service establishment in order to prevent or remediate an actual or imminent sewer overflow. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.18, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-467. Noncompliance fees, letters, and schedules.
(a)	Reinspection fee. Any food service establishment in noncompliance with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or with any provision of these regulations shall pay a noncompliance fee. The purpose of the noncompliance fee is to compensate the city and/or the sewer system provider for costs of additional inspections, followups, sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment, disposal, and administrative processing incurred as a result of the noncompliance, and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any penalties as may be assessed pursuant to these regulations. Noncompliance fees shall be in the amount adopted by action of the governing authority. 
(b)	Noncompliance letters. Immediately following every inspection and/or FOG evaluation, the food service establishment inspected shall receive a letter indicating the results of the inspection. A certified letter of noncompliance means the food service establishment is in violation of the applicable provisions of this Code. Letters of noncompliance shall include a description of the code being violated and the immediate course of action the food service establishment shall be required to take to come into compliance. Failure to comply with a letter of noncompliance is also a violation of these regulations. 
(c)	Compliance schedule. Upon determination that a food service establishment is noncompliant with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or any provision of these regulations or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a FOG interceptor, the FOG control program manager may also issue and require the food service establishment to abide by a compliance schedule. The issuance of a compliance schedule may contain terms and conditions including, but not limited to, requirements for installation of a FOG interceptor and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other provisions to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(d)	Fees. The FOG control program manager shall not issue a compliance schedule until such time as all amounts owed by the food service establishment to the city and/or sewer system provider are paid in full. If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule, the FOG control program manager may issue an order suspending or revoking the FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.19, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-468. Permit suspension and revocation.
(a)	Grounds to suspend or revoke. The FOG control program manager may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that a food service establishment: 
(1)	Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a noncompliance letter or compliance schedule order; 
(2)	Destroys, removes, conceals, or knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the city or county; 
(3)	Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city or county to determine permit terms or conditions, discharge compliance, or compliance with these regulations; 
(4)	Falsifies, tampers with, destroys, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method; 
(5)	Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city and/or county for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to these regulations; 
(6)	Causes interference, a sewer blockage, or a sanitary sewer overflow in the sewer system, violates FOG interceptor maintenance requirements, violates any condition or limit of its FOG wastewater discharge permit, or violates any provision of these regulations; or 
(7)	Refuses to accept a notice by personal service or certified mail. 
(b)	Notification.
(1)	When the FOG control program manager has reason to believe that grounds exist for permit suspension or revocation, he shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the food service establishment setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist, together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the director. The hearing date shall be not less than 15 calendar days or more than 45 calendar days after the mailing of such notice. 
(2)	At the suspension or revocation hearing, the food service establishment shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures established by the director. The director shall conduct the hearing and shall render a decision in writing within 30 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
(3)	The written decision and order of the director shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at the food service establishment's business address. Upon an order of suspension or revocation by the FOG control program manager becoming final, the food service establishment shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly into the public sewer system for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the food service establishment. Any owner or responsible management employee of the food service establishment shall be bound by the order of suspension or revocation. Upon an order of revocation by the FOG control program manager becoming final, the food service establishment shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the public sewer system. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the food service establishment. 
(4)	An order of permit suspension or revocation issued by the FOG control program manager shall be final in all respects on the 16th day after it is mailed to the food service establishment. 
(c)	Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operations of the sewer system. Any person who discharges any waste which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, sanitary sewer overflows, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the public sewer system and/or equipment, or to the operation of those facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for all costs required to clean and/or repair the facilities and/or equipment, together with expenses incurred by the city and sewer system provider to resume normal operations. A service charge of 25 percent of the city and sewer system provider's costs shall be added to the costs and charges to reimburse for miscellaneous overhead, including administrative personnel and recordkeeping. The total amount shall be payable within 45 days of invoicing. Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the sewer system provider violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the city and/or sewer system provider, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. 
(d)	Termination of water service to the food service establishment. The city, sewer system provider, or water service provider by order of the FOG control program manager, may physically terminate water service to any property as follows: 
(1)	If so ordered in any order of suspension or revocation of a permit; or 
(2)	Upon the failure of a person not holding a valid FOG wastewater discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the public sewer system after the issuance of a final order or suspension or revocation. 
All costs for physical termination of the water service shall be paid by the owner or operator of the food service establishment as well as all costs for reinstating service. 
(e)	Emergency suspension order. The city, sewer system provider, or water service provider may, by order of the FOG control program manager or designee, suspend water service when the FOG control program manager or designee determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause sanitary sewer overflows, sewer blockages, interference to the public sewer facilities, or may cause the city, sewer system provider or water service provider to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system. 
(f)	Emergency suspension hearing. As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an emergency suspension order, but in no event more than five business days following the issuance of such order, the director shall hold a hearing to provide a food service establishment the opportunity to present information in opposition to the issuance of the emergency suspension order. Such a hearing shall not stay the effect of the emergency suspension order. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures established by the director. The director shall issue a written decision and order within two business days following the hearing, which decision shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at that food service establishment's business address. This decision shall either lift the emergency suspension order or suspend or revoke the permit subject to the suspension and revocation appeal process set forth in these regulations. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.20, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-469. Criminal penalties.
(a)	Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this article, upon citation and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with section 1-11. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)	Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period, measured from the date of the first conviction, of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court however, the total fine shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(c)	Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of $1,000.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(d)	The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit the city nor the sewer system provider from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by this Code or city, county, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-265.21, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Secs. 25-470—25-491. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 25-492. Levied.
A service charge is levied and assessed for the operation and maintenance of the sewer system. This charge is based on the amount of potable water consumed per month by each contributor to the sewer system. The rate at which this charge is levied shall be as established by action of the governing authority of the sewer system provider. The charges imposed by this article may be periodically revised at the discretion of the governing authority of the sewer system provider. A readiness-to-serve charge is imposed for the operation of the sewer system based on the size of the customer's water meter. A surcharge for overstrength waste, i.e., wastes consisting of total suspended solids and/or five-day biochemical oxygen demand materials in concentrations exceeding 250 mg/l, ammonia in concentrations exceeding 30 mg/l, and total phosphorus exceeding ten mg/l, is levied at a rate approved and adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-276, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-493. Billing.
The sewer system provider shall prepare for each contributor to the sewerage system a monthly or bimonthly notice of the amount due. This notice shall be addressed and mailed to the address as designated by the owner or occupant of the property. Payment is due in full ten days from date notice is mailed, and shall be in default if not paid on or before the 20th day after the date of the notice. Failure to receive the notice in no way relieves the occupant of liability for the amount due. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-277, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-494. Collection.
The sewer system provider shall be responsible for the collection of all sewer service charges. It shall have deposited to the account of the water and sewer fund of the sewer system provider all sums collected for water and sewer services as soon as received. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-278, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-495. Disconnection of service for failure to pay.
If payment has not been received 20 calendar days after the date of the notice of amount due for sewer services, a default notice shall be sent to the occupant of the property. If payment is not received within ten days after the date of the default notice, then the sewer system provider shall initiate action to terminate water service until such time as all sums due for sewer service, including penalties, are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-279, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-496. Right to tax for benefit of sewer system.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting the right of the city or the governing authority of the sewer system provider to exercise its right as authorized by law to create, operate and maintain the sewerage system through the imposition of ad valorem taxation. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-281, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-497. Discharges to sewer system by persons or governments residing outside city.
No persons or governments residing or operating outside the limits of the city shall discharge or cause to be discharged any material into the public sewer system without the prior approval of the sewer system provider. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-282, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-498—25-517. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. PHOSPHORUS CONTROL
Sec. 25-518. Declaration of policy.
O.C.G.A. § 12-5-27.1 provides that whenever a local government entity is required by the environmental protection division to reduce phosphorus in its wastewater being discharged into the waters of the state, such local government entity shall pass an ordinance mandating the retail sale of low phosphorus household laundry detergent as part of its phosphorus reduction process. It is declared to be the public policy of the city to encourage the use of clean phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight. The city finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect Georgia's rivers and lakes downstream; promote health, safety, and welfare; and prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life, and property. It is vital to the health, well-being, and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the city that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-301, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-519. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household laundry detergent means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
(1)	A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes; 
(2)	A detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning equipment; 
(3)	A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner, or metal conditioner; 
(4)	A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production; 
(5)	A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
(6)	A detergent manufactured, stored, or distributed for use or sale outside of the state; 
(7)	A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory, and engineering laboratory; or 
(8)	A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for hospitals, health care facilities, or veterinary hospitals. 
Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-302, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-520. Sales prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-303, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-521. Penalties for violation.
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the $1,000.00 and may be subject to the provisions of section 1-11. Each sales transaction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-304, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Sec. 25-522. Civil action.
In addition to the penalty provided in section 25-521, the city may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-305, 1-22-2013)
Sec. 25-523. Individual right to damages.
Nothing in this division shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this division and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding thereof. 
(Ord. No. O2013-01-55, § 25-306, 1-22-2013)
Secs. 25-524—25-554. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. STORMWATER UTILITY
Sec. 25-555. Findings.
The mayor and city council makes the following findings: 
(1)	The city is authorized by the supplementary powers provisions of Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6) to provide a stormwater collection and disposal system throughout the city. 
(2)	The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act emphasizes the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and funding stormwater programs which address water quality impacts of stormwater runoff. 
(3)	Given the project cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses performed by the county and obtained by the city, it is appropriate to adopt a stormwater service fee rate methodology and to charge service fees to properties and persons within the city in a manner that recovers the cost of programs, systems and facilities and other costs associated therewith, including but not limited to allocations of the cost of services provided to the stormwater management utility by other funds of the city and other government entities and agencies, interest on bonds, operational and emergency reserves, allowances for delinquencies and bad debt, and such other costs as may be deemed reasonable and appropriate by the mayor and city council to ensure the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater programs, systems and facilities in the city. 
(4)	The stormwater conditions reflected in the study conducted by the county and obtained by the city reflect the current conditions of the stormwater system in the city. 
(5)	Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the city. Stormwater service fee rate methodology and service fees should be applicable throughout the city to enable the city to successfully manage operate and improve stormwater programs, systems and facilities at an advanced level. Service fees will also assist the city in meeting the regulatory obligations imposed by its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits by reducing pollution and increasing water quality within the city. 
(6)	The stormwater needs in the city include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Funding of stormwater programs, systems and facilities is therefore incidental to the fundamental regulatory function of the city in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)	Provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities renders and/or results in both services and benefits to individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city and to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city concurrently in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses, and the services and benefits differ among the individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents in relation to the demands they impose individually and collectively on the stormwater systems and facilities. 
(8)	The services and benefits rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may differ over time depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and facilities, and risk exposure. It is not practical to allocate the cost of the city's stormwater management programs, systems and facilities in direct relationship to the services or benefits rendered to or received by individual properties or persons over a brief span of time, but it is both practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among properties and persons in proportion to the long-term demands they impose on the city's stormwater programs, systems and facilities which render or result in services and benefits. 
(9)	The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed, installed and acquired through various mechanisms over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by the city, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-360, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-556. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Channel protection shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Manual, Volume 2, as amended hereafter. 
Credit means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based upon the terms and conditions of this article. 
Customer means all persons, properties, and entities served by the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Developed land means all property not deemed as undeveloped land. 
Direct lien means a lien enforced against an individual or property prior to obtaining a judgment against the individual or property, such as liens established by operation of law for unpaid taxes. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the unit of measure which provides the basis for comparing the runoff generated by one parcel with that generated by another. An ERU shall be the median impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of single detached dwelling lots in the city, which has been determined to be 3,000 square feet of impervious area. 
Impervious surfaces means those areas, which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings. 
Multiple dwelling lot means a developed lot on which more than one attached or detached residential dwelling units are located. Multiple dwelling lots include, but are not limited to, apartments, condominiums, duplexes and triplexes. 
Other developed land means, but shall not be limited to, commercial and office buildings, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, and agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces. 
Overbank flood protection shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Manual, Volume 2, as amended hereafter. 
Service fees means the stormwater management service fees applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be used only for the purpose of funding the city stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. 
Single dwelling lot means a developed lot containing one dwelling structure with its principal use being a residential dwelling. Single dwelling lots include, but are not limited to, single family homes and town homes characterized by fee simple ownership of both land and improved structures. 
Stormwater management system means any one or more of the various devices used in the collection, treatment, or disposition of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including all manmade structures or natural watercourse for the conveyance or transportation of runoff, such as: detention areas, berms, swales, improved watercourses, open channels, bridges, gulches, streams, gullies, flumes, culverts, gutters, pumping stations, pipes, ditches, siphons, catch basins and street facilities; all inlets; collection, drainage or disposal lines; intercepting sewers; disposal plants; outfall sewers; all pumping, power, and other equipment and appurtenances; all extension, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; and any and all rights or interests in such stormwater facilities. Stormwater facilities expressly excludes any of the foregoing which exist for, or are used exclusively for the purpose of collection, treating, measuring, supplying, or distributing potable water within or as part of the water supply and treatment system, or any of the foregoing which exist for or are used exclusively for the purpose of collecting, treating, or measuring effluent within or as part of the sanitary sewer system. 
Undeveloped land means a lot in its unaltered natural state and which has no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
Water quality shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Manual, Volume 2, as amended hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-361, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-557. Establishment of a utility.
(a)	There is established a stormwater utility which shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the city's jurisdictional limits, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. The stormwater utility management unit shall be composed of such personnel, employees and agents of the city as the mayor and city council may from time to time determine and their compensation shall be fixed and determined by the city manager as approved by the city council. 
(b)	A stormwater enterprise fund shall be established in the city budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater utility, including but not limited to rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses as may be established by the mayor and city council and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater enterprise fund and all expenses of the utility shall be paid from the stormwater enterprise fund, except that other revenues receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management programs, facilities, operations and capital investments as deemed appropriate by the city council, upon recommendation by the city manager. 
(c)	The mayor and city council confers upon the stormwater utility operational control over the existing stormwater management programs, systems and facilities performed, provided or owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including but not limited to properties other than roadways upon which such systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-362, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-558. Scope of responsibility for the stormwater utility.
(a)	The stormwater utility shall be responsible for plan approval and construction inspection of both private stormwater facilities and public stormwater facilities located within the city. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the design and construction of public stormwater facilities owned by the city and shall inspect, operate, and maintain them as prescribed herein. 
(b)	The city drainage system consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the political boundaries of the city which control and/or convey stormwater through which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and properties. The city owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvement of those stormwater systems and facilities which: 
(1)	Are located within public streets, rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)	Are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems and facilities; 
(3)	Are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or 
(4)	Are determined by the city attorney to be the city's responsibility. 
(c)	The stormwater utility shall provide for inspection of private facilities to ascertain that the stormwater facilities are functioning as designed and approved. The stormwater utility shall provide for remedial maintenance of facilities based upon the severity of stormwater problems and potential hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare, and in cases where such remedial maintenance is required the city may bill the owner of the private facility for the costs of such maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-363, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-559. General fund policy.
(a)	General fund policy. It shall be the policy of the city that funding for the stormwater utility program, systems and facilities shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater program, systems and facilities by individual properties or persons and/or the level of service rendered by or resulting from the provision of stormwater programs, systems and facilities. Stormwater service charge rates shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable, and the resultant service charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing services and facilities. Similarly situated properties shall be charged similar rentals, rates, charges, fees or licenses. Service charge rates shall be structured to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other funding methods employed for stormwater management within the city, including but not limited to general tax revenues allocated to stormwater management, plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges and special assessments. 
(b)	The cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may include operating, capital investment and reserve expenses, and may consider stormwater quality as well as stormwater quantity management problems, needs and requirements. 
(c)	To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges and/or other methods of funding stormwater management shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater systems or facilities or to private stormwater facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater systems or facilities. 
(d)	Stormwater utility service charge rates, fees and other similar charges shall be established by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-364, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-560. Stormwater service fees/rates.
Stormwater service fee rates may be determined and modified from time to time by the mayor and city council so that the total revenue generated by the fees and any other sources of revenues or other resources allocated to stormwater management by the city council shall be sufficient to meet the cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities, including but not limited to the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, operating expense, capital outlays, nonoperating expense, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the city council. Stormwater service fee revenues in any given year may exceed or be less than the cost of service in that year, provided, however, that the stormwater service fee rate shall be based on meeting the long-term projected cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities. All unencumbered stormwater management funds derived from service fees and other sources of revenue not expended at the end of a fiscal year shall remain in the stormwater management utility enterprise fund account and balances shall be forwarded to the next fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-365, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-561. Exemptions.
The following properties are exempt from stormwater utility fees: 
(1)	Undeveloped land; 
(2)	All public rights-of-way; 
(3)	Railroad rights-of-way (tracks). However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges; and 
(4)	Any property whereby 100 percent of the stormwater runoff is contained on the premises and no runoff enters into the stormwater management system. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-366, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-562. Credits.
(a)	Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit for on-site systems or facilities. Stormwater service charge credits shall be determined based on the technical requirements design and performance standards contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(b)	Property owners seeking service charge credits must apply for stormwater service charge credits through completion and submittal to the city of a stormwater service charge credit application prior to January 1 of the year in which stormwater service charges are to be billed by the city. Credits will only be granted through applications approved by the city for the remainder of the year in which stormwater service charges are to be billed. Any credits issued by the county in 2012 or any application received by the county before January 1, 2013, are accepted as valid credits and applications for the city for the calendar year 2013. 
(c)	Upon receipt of a timely filed completed application, the city manager or designee shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit has been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within 45 days of the date the completed application was submitted to the city. 
(d)	Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on: 
(1)	Continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time; and 
(2)	Upon continuing provision of the systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. 
The city may revoke any credit at any time for noncompliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-367, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-563. Inspection of private facilities.
Continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards may be verified by city inspection of the systems or facilities upon which the credit is based. No credit shall be given under this article unless the property owner agrees in writing in its application that the city shall have the right for its designated officers, representatives, agents, and employees to enter upon private and public property, upon reasonable notice to the owner of such property, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering testing on such property in order to assure compliance with the city's design and performance standards. On-site systems or facilities determined to no longer comply with the city's design and performance standards shall subject the property owner to revocation of all, or a portion of, stormwater service charge credits based on the city inspections' estimate of capacity reduction for a period of not less than one year. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-368, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-564. Stormwater service charge, billing, delinquencies and collections.
A stormwater service fee bill may be sent though the United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. The stormwater service fee bill may be billed and collected along with other fees and charges, including but not limited other utility bills, assessments or property taxes, as deemed most effective and efficient by the city manager. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fees and other charges and any associated fines or penalties, including but not limited to interest on delinquent service fees. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land, the city may backbill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency during that back-billed period. A late charge of one percent of the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service fee bill shall be charged when a bill becomes delinquent. Thereafter, an additional charge of one percent based on the unpaid bill and any applicable delinquency charge shall be charged for each month the bill remains delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-369, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-565. Stormwater utility service inspections and enforcement.
Every owner of real property located in the city, and every person who serves as a contractor or developer for the purpose of developing real property located in the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems and facilities sufficient to collect, convey, detain, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city ordinances and development regulations, and the laws of the state and the United States of America. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by any damaged party or the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner or developer, if any, on a joint and several basis. From the date of the filing of such action, the city shall have lien rights, which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the superior court of the county. The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-370, 5-14-2013)
Sec. 25-566. Appeals.
Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)	An appeal must be filed in writing with the city manager or his designated representative. In the case of stormwater service fee appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions that influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)	Using information provided by the appellant, the city manager or designee shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 60 days. In response to an appeal, the city manager may adjust the stormwater service fee applicable to any property in conformance with the general purposes and intent of this article. 
(3)	All decisions by the city manager shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. All decisions of the city manager shall be final. 
(4)	Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have a right to appeal by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 days of the city's order or decision. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05-03A, § 25-371, 5-14-2013)
Secs. 25-567—25-595. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. STORM SEWER ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 25-596. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city municipal separate storm sewer system (city MS4) the maximum extent practicable as required by state and federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)	Protect, maintain, and enhance the short-term and long-term public health, safety, and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by providing for regulation and management of the city MS4, including public and private stormwater conveyances in city's service area. 
(2)	Comply with state EPD and federal EPA stormwater regulations, as defined herein, developed pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act and the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. 
(3)	Control the contribution of pollutants to the city MS4 by stormwater discharges associated with commercial and industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of commercial and industrial activity. 
(4)	Prohibit illegal connections to the city MS4. 
(5)	Control illicit discharges to the city MS4 of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater. 
(6)	Control, through intergovernmental agreements, the contribution of pollutants from one municipality or county system to another. 
(7)	Provide for intergovernmental cooperation in management, monitoring and enforcement of the city stormwater management program among the city and the county. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-502), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-597. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the city MS4 which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Authorized representative means: 
(1)	If the discharger is a business, an owner, partner, corporate officer or highest ranking employee of the business employed at the facility from which the discharge or connection was made; 
(2)	If the discharger is a federal, state or local government facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or that person's designee. 
Best management practices or BMPs means a wide range of stormwater management regulations, procedures, engineering designs, activities, prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater. 
City municipal separate storm sewer system (city MS4) means a stormwater conveyance or system of stormwater conveyances that are all of the following; owned or maintained by the city, as described in article V of this chapter; designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; is not a combined sewer; not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW); and not owned or operated by any other government entity. 
City stormwater management program means that program of activities and procedures for stormwater management as set forth in the application for the permit, as approved by the state EPD, and any amendment or modification thereto, including the city stormwater inspection and maintenance policy and the city stormwater extent of service/level of service policy. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits, including but not limited to construction projects resulting in land disturbance, cleaning and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Cooling water means water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device or apparatus. 
Department, unless otherwise specified, means the public works department and its divisions which are responsible for stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this article or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce this article or any portion thereof. 
Director means the director of public works or designee or, when a department other than the public works department is designated to enforce provisions of this article or any portion thereof, the director of such department or designee. 
Discharge means the spill, draining, dumping, deposit, seeping, disposal, placement, release or loss of any material or substance to the city MS4. 
Discharger means any person that permits pollutants to enter the city Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer System. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Federal Clean Water Act or Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, presently codified at 33 USC 1251 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
Federal EPA or EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Georgia Water Quality Control Act or Water Quality Control Act means the Georgia Quality Control Act, as amended, presently codified at O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
Groundwater means water beneath the earth's surface between saturated soil and rock. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)	Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a federal, state or local law enforcement agency; or 
(2)	Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized local, state or federal enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city MS4, except as exempted in division 3 of this article. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.6(b)(14), as amended. 
Maintenance means any action necessary to preserve stormwater conveyances in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this article or to prevent structural failure of such conveyances. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the state EPD under the authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or general area. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit for discharges issued by the state EPD on or about June 15, 1994, or such subsequent permit or authorization for discharges from the city MS4 to waters of the state. 
Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, and includes any individual, firm, corporation, government agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, such that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and concrete and cement. 
Pollution or polluted means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including, but not limited to, change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters; or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into the city MS4 as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render any waters contained therein or discharged into waters of the state harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Private means property or stormwater conveyances owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state or federal governments. 
Procedure means a procedure adopted by the department to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this article or other chapters of this Code, or other ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agencies. 
Regulation means any regulation, rule, development standard, or other requirement prepared by the department and adopted by the city council pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
Sanitary sewer system means the complete sanitary sewer system which discharges sanitary sewerage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant. 
Site means any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land. 
State EPD or EPD means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stormwater conveyance means natural or constructed stormwater conduits, features, facilities or best management practices designed or used for the collection, conveyance or treatment of stormwater through open or closed drainage systems, including, but not limited to, pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, detention ponds, retention ponds, infiltration devices, oil/water separators, sediment basins, or other such devices. 
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity means the discharge from any stormwater conveyance which is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial facility. The term "stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity" includes, but is not limited to, stormwater discharges from industrial facility yards; immediate access roads and rails lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials, manufactured products, waste materials or by-products used or created by the facility; material handling sites; refuse sites; sites used for the storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; sites used for application or disposal of process wastewater; sites used for residual treatment, storage, or disposal; shipping and receiving areas; manufacturing buildings; storage areas (including tank farms for raw materials, and intermediate and finished products) and areas where industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to stormwater. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater in a manner to meet the objectives of this article and which shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
Stormwater runoff means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
Unpolluted means the absence of pollution. 
Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-503), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-598. Cooperation with other governments.
The city may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purposes of this article, comply with the provisions of the permit, and to implement the city stormwater management program. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, agreements regarding enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes cooperative stormwater management programs and cooperative monitoring, maintenance, enforcement and management of municipal separate storm sewer systems, or other action may be needed to control the contribution of pollutants and between any municipal system and the city MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-571), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 25-599—25-627. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. POWERS
Sec. 25-628. Scope of regulation.
(a)	The provisions of this article shall apply throughout incorporated city to any developed and undeveloped land unless expressly exempted. 
(b)	The director, acting through the department, shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(c)	The director, acting through the department, shall be responsible for the conservation, management, maintenance (where applicable), extension and improvement of the city MS4, including activities necessary to control stormwater discharges, and activities necessary to carry out stormwater management programs included in the permit. 
(d)	The provisions of this article shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers or authority granted by federal, state or local law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-511), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-629. Powers of the department.
(a)	The department shall have the power to administer and enforce all regulations and procedures adopted to implement this article, including the right to maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article, or to seek recovery of damages, fees or costs. 
(b)	The department can: 
(1)	Administer, coordinate and oversee conservation, acquisition, extension, improvement, design, construction, management, operation and maintenance of the city MS4; 
(2)	Establish or oversee establishment of regulations for control, management, and enhancement of the quality or quantity of stormwater and establish procedures and guidelines to implement such regulations; 
(3)	Determine the manner in which stormwater conveyances should be operated; 
(4)	Inspect and enforce private stormwater conveyances which discharge to the city MS4; 
(5)	Advise the city council and other city departments or agencies on issues related to stormwater; 
(6)	Protect the city MS4 and stormwater conveyances and properties owned or maintained by city and prescribe how they are used by others; 
(7)	Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater discharges to the city MS4 to comply with the terms of this article, including regulations and procedures adopted pursuant thereto, with respect to the installation of stormwater conveyances or best management practices; 
(8)	Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the city MS4; 
(9)	Develop, adopt and implement the city stormwater management program, including the city stormwater inspection and maintenance policy and the city stormwater extent of service/level of service policy; and 
(10)	Comply with federal and state regulations and permits concerning the city MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-512), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 25-630—25-646. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. REGULATED STORMWATER DISCHARGES
Sec. 25-647. Regulation of quantity of stormwater discharges.
The quantity of stormwater discharges to the city MS4 shall be regulated as set forth in sections 14-29 and 14-77 and other applicable city ordinances and Code provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-522), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-648. Prohibited and illicit discharges.
It is unlawful for any person to discharge or to cause, permit, or suffer to be discharged any pollutants or any water or stormwater containing any pollutants to any component of the city MS4. Such discharge shall be deemed an illicit discharge and constitutes a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-523), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-649. Prohibited and illegal connections.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to connect a stormwater conveyance of any type that discharges any matter of any nature that is not composed entirely of stormwater or such unpolluted water as exempted in accordance with the provisions of section 25-650. Such connection shall be deemed an illegal connection and constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Illegal connections must be disconnected and redirected immediately, as necessary and appropriate, to the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the authority having jurisdiction to provide sanitary sewer service within the city. Any such redirection to the sanitary sewer system must be in compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code, state and federal law and regulations. 
(c)	The prohibition against illegal connections expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(d)	Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in the city's plans or maps, and which is illegally connected to the city MS4, shall be relocated immediately by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the director requiring that such relocation be completed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-524), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-650. Exemptions from prohibition on illicit discharges and illegal connections.
(a)	The following categories of discharges and connections are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in sections 25-648 and 25-649 unless the director determines that the following discharge or connection is a significant source of pollution: 
(1)	Water line flushing performed or approved by the director and other unpolluted discharges from potable water sources; 
(2)	Landscape irrigation and lawn watering; 
(3)	Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
(4)	Diverted stream flows; 
(5)	Rising ground water; 
(6)	Groundwater infiltration to the city MS4; 
(7)	Water from foundation and footing drains(not including active groundwater dewatering systems) crawl space pumps, and air conditioning condensation; 
(8)	Springs; 
(9)	Individual residential car washing where biodegradable soap is used; 
(10)	Natural flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(11)	Unpolluted dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(12)	Flows from firefighting; or 
(13)	Other water not containing pollutants. 
(b)	In the event that the director determines a discharge or connection to constitute a significant source of pollution, then the director shall notify the discharger that the discharge or connection is prohibited by the terms of this article, and the discharger shall be required to immediately cease the illicit discharge or disconnect the illegal connection. 
(c)	The discharger, after notice, shall immediately cease the illicit discharge or disconnect the illegal connection and bring any discharge or connection to the city MS4 into compliance with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(d)	This section shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the EPA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations. The discharger must supply the director with a copy of the NPDES permit or order. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-525), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-651. Stormwater discharges associated with industrial or construction activity.
(a)	Discharges of stormwater associated with industrial activities or construction activities must comply with the permit requirements of the NPDES program for stormwater discharges and the regulations in chapter 14. Specific dischargers of stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity are responsible for submitting a permit application to the state EPD. 
(b)	A copy of the permit application shall be submitted to the director. 
(c)	Discharges of stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity must comply with all provisions of this article for any discharges which are made to the city MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-526), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-652. Appeal of denial of exemption.
(a)	Any person aggrieved by the determination of the director that a discharge or connection, otherwise exempted under the provisions of section 25-650, is a significant source of pollution may file with the director a notice of appeal of such determination to the board of appeals. The notice of appeal must be in writing and received within 15 days of receipt of the notice of the determination from the director that such discharge or connection constitutes a source of pollution. The notice of appeal must set forth the reasons that the person believes that the determination of the director should be rescinded. 
(b)	An appeal shall be sustained only upon the express written finding by the board of appeals that the director's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that the director acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of an exemption provided all requirements imposed by all applicable laws are met. The board may also remand any appeal for the receipt of additional information. 
(c)	The fact that a person has appealed the determination of the director shall not delay or otherwise hinder any notice of violation, citation or other enforcement action or proceeding brought by the director to enforce the provisions of this article after notice of the determination. 
(d)	Appeals from the decision of the board of appeals shall be by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-527), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2019-05-09, I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 25-653. Notification of accidental discharges and spills.
(a)	Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city's separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)	Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city public works department within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)	In the event such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)	Failure to provide notification of a release as provided in this section is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-528), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 25-654—25-679. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. MAINTENANCE
Sec. 25-680. Stormwater conveyances; ownership, inspection and public access.
(a)	All stormwater conveyances shall be privately owned and maintained, unless accepted for public ownership and maintenance by the city. 
(b)	The city may require dedication of privately owned stormwater conveyances which discharge to the city MS4. 
(c)	Owners of stormwater conveyances that discharge to the city MS4 shall maintain a perpetual non-exclusive casement that allows for monitoring, inspection and emergency maintenance by city. 
(d)	Where stormwater conveyances are accepted by the city for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided by the property owner to the city and recorded in the real property records of city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-541), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 25-681—25-703. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION
Sec. 25-704. Investigation.
The department shall have authority to investigate any apparent violation of any provision of this article and to take any action authorized by this article which it deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-551), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-705. Inspection and right of entry.
(a)	The department may inspect any stormwater conveyance within or outside of an existing drainage easement. 
(b)	The department, bearing proper credentials and identification, and in accordance with state and federal law, shall be permitted to enter private or public property at reasonable times to inspect or investigate conditions relating to the enforcement of this article, the investigation of any apparent violation of any provision of this article, compliance with the terms of the permit, observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to the city stormwater management program or compliance with the permit, and periodic investigations in accordance with provisions of this article. The department shall notify the owner of the property or the representative on-site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(c)	The department, bearing proper credentials and identification, and in accordance with state and federal law, shall be permitted to enter private or public property at reasonable times for repairs, maintenance and other similar purposes related to any portion of the city MS4. The department shall notify the owner of the property or the representative on-site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(d)	The department, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant for the purpose of inspection or investigation of conditions relating to the enforcement of this article, compliance with the terms of the permit, or observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to the city stormwater management program or the permit, and periodic investigations in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)	Inspection warrants may be issued by the municipal court when the issuing judge is satisfied that the department has established by oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection that includes the property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of the property. 
(2)	An inspection warrant will be validly issued only if it meets the following requirements: 
a.	The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. 
b.	The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or occupant of the property or discharger can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. 
c.	The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. 
d.	The warrant refers, in general terms, to the code provisions sought to be enforced. 
e.	Measurements, samples, tests and analyses performed by city or required of any discharger to the city MS4 shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 136, unless another method is approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-552), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-706. Emergency powers.
(a)	If, after inspection, the condition of a stormwater conveyance presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, city shall have the right to take action as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and make the stormwater conveyance safe. 
(b)	The department may conduct emergency maintenance or remediation operations on private property and on private stormwater conveyances. Emergency maintenance or remediation operations shall constitute actions to remedy conditions that in the opinion of the director create a condition potentially injurious to life, property or the city MS4. 
(c)	Emergency maintenance conducted on any stormwater conveyance shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-553), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-707. Authority to require person to cooperate with department.
Whenever required to carry out the objectives of this article, including but not limited to obtaining information regarding permit compliance, implementing the city stormwater management program, or determining whether any person is in violation of any provision of this article, the director may in writing require a discharger to the city MS4 to: 
(1)	Establish and maintain records; 
(2)	Make reports; 
(3)	Install, use, and maintain monitoring equipment or methods, including where appropriate, biological monitoring methods; 
(4)	Sample such discharges, in accordance with such methods, at such locations, at such intervals, and in such manner as the director shall prescribe; and 
(5)	Provide such other information as he may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-554), 12-16-2014)
Secs. 25-708—25-727. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 25-728. Notice of violation and summons.
(a)	Whenever the department determines that a violation of this article or regulations and procedures adopted thereto has occurred, the department shall serve upon the discharger a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, and state that, if the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the department, a summons shall be issued for the discharger to appear in municipal court. The notice of violation shall set forth the potential penalty involved and the fact that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the foregoing, the department may issue a summons to appear in municipal court without first issuing a notice of violation if, in the judgment of the director, the illicit discharge or illicit connection was not an accidental discharge or if the violation constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, general welfare, or the city MS4. 
(c)	If the violation has not been remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation, the department shall issue a summons to the discharger to appear in municipal court. The summons shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, set forth the penalty if the discharger is convicted of the violation, and state that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(d)	Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the department to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-561), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-729. Submission of a corrective plan.
(a)	Within ten business days of conviction by municipal court or resolution of any appeal, the discharger shall submit to the director a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation, including corrective and preventive procedures, and implementation of best management practices, where necessary to prevent recurrence. 
(b)	Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring after conviction of the violation. The failure to submit this plan as required by this section shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-562), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-730. Cease and desist order.
When the director finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article or that the discharger's past violations are likely to recur; the director may issue an order to the discharger directing the discharger to cease and desist all such violations and to: 
(1)	Immediately comply with the provisions of this article; 
(2)	Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation and to prevent recurrence of the violation; and 
(3)	Each day of violation of a cease and desist order, after notice thereof, shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-563), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-731. Penalties.
(a)	Any discharger who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction in municipal court, shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment, or both as provided in section 1-11. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-564), 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2019-02-08, § 1(Attch.), 2-26-2019)
Sec. 25-732. Injunctive proceedings.
(a)	The city may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this article or to correct violations of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief which restrains the violation or compels the requirements imposed by this article on activities of the discharger. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the discharger to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a discharger. 
(b)	The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, environmental impacts assessments, geotechnical work, and the costs of any actual damages incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, costs of containment and cleanup. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-565), 12-16-2014)
Sec. 25-733. Civil damages and violations.
(a)	If a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, the city may file a civil damage action against the discharger, through the city attorney, seeking such damages, fees and costs as are permitted by law. 
(b)	In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, the violation may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(c)	The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and city may pursue cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12-07, § 1(24-566), 12-16-2014)
Chapter 27 ZONING
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY.
Sec. 27-1. Title and components.
(a)	The official title of this chapter 27 of the Brookhaven Code of Ordinances is the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Brookhaven, Georgia. For convenience, it is referred to throughout this chapter as the "zoning ordinance." 
(b)	The zoning ordinance is comprised of the text of this chapter and the official zoning map, both of which are maintained in the community development department. The text and the map together constitute the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.1), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-2. Authority.
This zoning ordinance is enacted pursuant to the city's authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning granted by the Ga. Const. art. IX, section II, ¶ IV; by the city's authority to enact regulations and exercise powers granted by the Ga. Const. art. IX, section II, ¶¶ I and III; by authority granted by the State of Georgia; by Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.) § 36-66-2(b); by the Charter of the City of Brookhaven section 1.03(b)(25); by the city's general police powers; and by other powers and authority provided by other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.2), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-3. Applicability.
(a)	The regulations of this zoning ordinance apply to all buildings, structures, land and uses within the incorporated area of the city. 
(b)	All buildings and structures erected, all uses of land, water, buildings or structures established, all structural alterations or relocations of existing buildings, and all enlargements of, additions to, changes in and relocations of existing uses are subject to all regulations of this zoning ordinance that are applicable to the zoning district in which such buildings, structures, uses or land are located. Existing buildings, structures and uses that comply with the regulations of this zoning ordinance are subject to all regulations of this zoning ordinance. Existing buildings, structures and uses that do not comply with the regulations of this zoning ordinance are authorized to continue, subject to the nonconformity regulations of article XII. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.3), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-4. Effective date.
The provisions of this zoning ordinance become effective on and compliance with its provisions becomes mandatory beginning November 27, 2018, unless otherwise expressly stated in a specific ordinance provision. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.4), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-5. Purpose.
This zoning ordinance is enacted to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the city and to help implement relevant provisions of the comprehensive plan and other adopted plans and policies of the city. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.5), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-6. General prohibition.
No building or structure, and no use of any building, structure, land, or property, and no lot of record, may be established, constructed, expanded, altered, moved, diminished, divided, eliminated or maintained in any manner except in conformity with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.6), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-7. Minimum requirements.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.7), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-8. Compliance with other regulations.
In addition to the requirements of this zoning ordinance, all uses and development shall comply with all other applicable state and federal regulations, including requirements for licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.8), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-9. Conflicting provisions.
(a)	State or federal regulations. If the provisions of this zoning ordinance are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision governs, to the extent allowed by law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls. 
(b)	Other city regulations. If the provisions of this zoning ordinance are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the city, the more restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(c)	Private agreements and covenants.
(1)	This zoning ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of this zoning ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement or covenant, the provisions of this zoning ordinance control. 
(2)	Private restrictive covenants to which the city is not a party are not regulated by or enforced by the city. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.9), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-10. Delegation of authority.
Whenever a provision of this zoning ordinance requires the community development director or another officer or employee of the city to perform an act or duty, that provision is to be construed as authorizing the department head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have authority. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.10), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-11. Definitions and interpretation of ordinance language.
See article XIII. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.11), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-12. Severability.
The several provisions of this zoning ordinance are separable in accordance with the following rules: 
(1)	If any court of competent jurisdiction adjudges any section or provision of this zoning ordinance to be invalid, such judgment does not affect the validity or continued application of zoning ordinance as a whole or any section or provision other than the sections or provisions specifically adjudged to be invalid. 
(2)	If any court of competent jurisdiction adjudges as invalid the application of any section or provision of this zoning ordinance to a particular property, building or structure, such judgment does not affect the application of the section or provision to any other property, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.12), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-13—27-22. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ZONING MAP
Sec. 27-23. Establishment.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this zoning ordinance are depicted on the City of Brookhaven's Official Zoning Map, which is available for public inspection in the office of the community development director. The official zoning map shall be signed by the mayor and dated with the date of adoption. The official zoning map—together with all notations, references, data and other information shown on the map— is adopted and incorporated into this zoning ordinance. It is as much a part of this zoning ordinance as if actually depicted within its pages. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.13), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-24. Maintenance and updates.
The community development director is responsible for directing revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its amendment as soon as possible after the effective date of zoning map amendments. No unauthorized person may alter or modify the official zoning map. The community development director may authorize printed copies of the official zoning map to be produced, and shall maintain digital or printed copies of superseded versions of the official zoning map for historical reference. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.14), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-25. District boundaries.
Zoning district boundary lines shall be described by legal description or by a map that accompanies the ordinance establishing the district or amending the district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.15), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-26. Interpretation of zoning map.
(a)	General. Where any uncertainty exists about a zoning boundary that was established by legal description, the legal description accompanying the amending ordinance governs. In other cases, community development director is authorized to make an interpretation in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys will be construed to follow centerlines of rights-of-way or prescriptive easements. In case of closure of a street or alley, or vacation of any easement, the boundary shall be construed as remaining at its previous location unless ownership of the closure or vacated area is divided other than at the center, in which case the boundary will be construed as moving to correspond with the ownership, but not beyond any previous right-of-way or easement line. 
(2)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines will be construed as following those lot lines. 
(3)	Boundaries indicated as following city corporate boundary limit lines will be construed as following those corporate boundaries. 
(4)	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway in the railroad right-of-way. 
(5)	Boundaries indicated as following shorelines of bodies of water will be construed to follow those shorelines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of creeks, streams or other predominantly linear bodies of water will be construed to follow those centerlines. 
(6)	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or concentric with, or extensions of features indicated in paragraphs (1) through (5) of this section, shall be construed to follow those features. Distances and dimensions not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined from the zoning map by the community development director. 
(7)	When areas appear to be unclassified on the zoning map, and classification cannot be established by the rules of this section and there is no other evidence of its existing or past classification, such areas shall be considered to be classified in the R-100 district until action is taken to amend the zoning map. 
(b)	Split-zoned lots. 
(1)	The zoning map may not be amended to classify a single lot into two or more base zoning districts. This provision does not apply to overlay zoning districts. 
(2)	Lots may not be reconfigured to create a split-zoned lot (into more than one base zoning district classification. This provision does not apply to overlay zoning districts. 
(3)	If an existing lot is split into two or more zoning districts, each portion of the split-zoned lot is subject to the zoning district regulations that apply to such portion. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.16), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-02-03, § I, 2-28-2023)
Secs. 27-27—27-36. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 27-37. General.
The provisions of this section address the transition to this zoning ordinance from the zoning ordinance in effect immediately preceding the effective date specified in section 27-4. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.17), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-38. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All other ordinances or resolutions in conflict with this zoning ordinance are hereby repealed. This provision does not repeal conditions of use, operation, or site development accompanying zoning approvals or permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions. Modification or repeal of past conditions of approval may be accomplished as authorized and provided by this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.18), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-39. Applications, permits and approvals.
(a)	Any building, development or structure for which a building permit was issued or a complete building permit application had been accepted for processing before the effective date specified in section 27-4 may be completed in conformance with the issued building permit and other applicable permits and conditions, even if such building, development or structure does not comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If the building, development or structure is not commenced and completed within the time allowed under the original building permit and any authorized permit extension, the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)	Complete applications for special land use permits, variances or other zoning-related approvals that are pending approval on the effective date specified in section 27-4 shall be reviewed wholly under the terms of the zoning ordinance in effect immediately preceding the effective date specified in section 27-4 Building permits for construction and development approved under such zoning approvals may be issued in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)	The community development director is authorized to issue building permits for construction or development approved before the effective date specified in section 27-4 and for developments pending approval under subsection (b) of this section, even if such building, development or structure does not fully comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If building is not commenced and completed within the time allowed under the building permit and any authorized permit extension, then the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
(d)	When a use requiring approval through the special land use permit process under this zoning ordinance exists as an approved special land use permit or permitted use on the effective date specified in section 27-4, that use will be considered a lawfully established use. When any amendment to this zoning ordinance changes the classification of a permitted use to a special land use permit, any use lawfully established before such amendment will be considered a lawfully established special land use permit after the effective date of the amendment. A lawfully established existing use that is not allowed as a special land use permit or permitted use in the district in which the use is now located will be considered a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.19), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-40. Violations continue.
The adoption of this zoning ordinance does not affect any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the previous zoning ordinance that occurred before the effective date specified in section 27-4. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.20), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-41. Zoning name conversions.
The residential zoning district names in effect before the effective date specified in section 27-4 are converted in this zoning ordinance as indicated in table 1-1. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.21), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-42—27-51. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 27-52. District list.
The city's residential zoning districts are listed in table 2-1. Whenever this zoning ordinance refers to "residential" zoning districts or "R" zoning districts, it is referring to these districts. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.22), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-53. District descriptions.
(a)	General. Residential zoning districts are primarily intended to create, maintain and promote a variety of housing opportunities for individual households and to maintain and promote the desired physical character of existing and developing neighborhoods. While the districts primarily accommodate residential uses, some nonresidential uses are also allowed. The various R district are primarily differentiated on the basis of allowed uses, allowed building types and lot and building regulations. 
(b)	RS, Single-Dwelling Detached Districts. The RS districts are primarily intended to accommodate detached houses. The number suffix attached to RS district names is a shorthand reference to the minimum lot width required for detached houses. 
(c)	RSA, Single-Dwelling Attached Districts. The RSA districts are primarily intended to accommodate attached houses, two-flats and three-flats (also known as "duplexes" and "triplexes," respectively). The number suffix attached to RSA district names is a shorthand reference to the maximum density allowed for attached house developments in the subject district. 
(d)	R3, Two- and Three-Unit District. The R3 district is primarily intended to accommodate two-flats and three-flats (also known as "duplexes" and "triplexes," respectively). 
(e)	RM, Multi-Unit Districts. The RM districts are primarily intended to accommodate multi-unit residential buildings. The number suffix attached to RM district names is a shorthand reference to the maximum density allowed for multi-unit residential developments. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.23), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-54. Use regulations.
Uses are allowed in R districts in accordance with the use regulations of article VII. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.24), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-55. Building types.
(a)	Allowed residential uses shall occupy residential buildings, which are allowed in R districts in accordance with table 2-2. 
(b)	Allowed public and civic uses shall occupy civic buildings, which are allowed in R districts, as indicated in table 2-2. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.25), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, 12-19-2023)
Sec. 27-56. Generally applicable regulations.
(a)	Accessory uses and structures. See article 7, division 11 of this chapter. 
(b)	Parking. See article VIII. 
(c)	Landscaping and screening. See article IX. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.26), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-57—27-66. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. DETACHED HOUSES
Sec. 27-67. Lot and building regulations—RS Districts.
Detached houses are allowed in all RS districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 2-3 (see also figure 2-1). 


[1] Lots fronting on the bulb of a cul-de-sac shall have at least 35 feet of frontage and be at least 50 feet in width.  [2] ;hg;Average front yard setbacks shall be used for residential infill development. See Sec. 27-1336.  [3] ;hg;Plus 15 feet if abutting arterial street.  [4] ;hg;Street-facing garage entries shall be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the street right-of-way, whichever results in a greater setback.  [5] ;hg;Minimum 20-foot rear setback required for accessory buildings and structures when rear yard adjoins side yard of abutting lot. Accessory structures shall not extend beyond the architectural front wall plane of adjacent house when rear yard adjoins side yard of abutting lot.  [6] ;hg;Or height of principal building, whichever is less. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.27), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2021-02-01, § I(Attch.), 2-9-2021; Ord. No. RZ-2023-02-03, § I, 2-28-2023)
Sec. 27-68. Lot and building regulations—R3, RSA and RM Districts.
Detached houses are allowed in all R3, RSA and RM districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 2-4 (see also figure 2-1). 


[1] Lots fronting on the bulb of a cul-de-sac shall have at least 35 feet of frontage and be at least 50 feet in width.  [2] ;hg;Average front yard setbacks shall be used for residential infill development. See section 27-1336.  [3] ;hg;Plus 15 feet if abutting arterial street.  [4] ;hg;Street-facing garage entries shall be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the street right-of-way, whichever results in a greater setback.  [5] ;hg;Minimum 20-foot rear setback required for accessory buildings and structures when rear yard adjoins side yard of abutting lot; Accessory structures shall not extend beyond the architectural front wall plane of adjacent house.  [6] ;hg;Or height of principal building, whichever is less.  


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.28), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2021-02-01, § I(Attch.), 2-9-2021; Ord. No. RZ-2023-02-03, § I, 2-28-2023)
Secs. 27-69—27-78. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. ATTACHED HOUSES
Sec. 27-79. Lot and building regulations—RSA and RM Districts.
Attached houses are allowed in all RSA and RM districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 2-5 (see also figure 2-3). 


[1] Street-facing garage entries shall be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the street right-of-way, whichever results in a greater setback.  [2] ;hg;Minimum 25-foot rear setback required for accessory buildings when rear yard adjoins side yard of abutting lot.  [3] ;hg;Or height of principal building, whichever is less.  [4] ;hg;Maximum height for RSA-18 is 52 feet, except for buildings or portions of buildings within 100 feet of RS-100, RS-85, RS-75, RS-60, RS-50, R-3 and detached units within the RSA districts which shall have a maximum height of 40 feet. The distance is measured from the common property line without an intervening public street.  

Figure 2-3. Attached Houses in RSA-8, RS-18 and RM Districts 

(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.29), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. RZ2023-12-09, § I, 12-19-2023)
Secs. 27-80—27-89. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. TWO-FLATS AND THREE-FLATS
Sec. 27-90. Lot and building regulations—R3, RSA and RM Districts.
Two-flats and three-flats are allowed in all R3, RSA and RM districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 2-6 (see also figure 2-4). 


[1] Plus 15 feet if abutting arterial street.  [2] ;hg;Street-facing garage entries shall be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the street right-of-way, whichever results in a greater setback.  [3] ;hg;Minimum 25-foot rear setback required for accessory buildings when rear yard adjoins side yard of abutting lot.  [4] ;hg;Or height of principal building, whichever is less.  

Figure 2-4. Two-Flats and Three-Flats in RSA and RM Districts 

(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.30), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 27-91—27-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
Sec. 27-101. Lot and building regulations—RM Districts.
Multi-unit residential buildings (four or more dwelling units) are allowed in all RM districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 2-7 (see also figure 2-5). 


[1] Plus 15 feet if abutting arterial street.  [2] ;hg;Street-facing garage entries shall be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the street right-of-way, whichever results in a greater setback.  [3] ;hg;Minimum 25-foot rear setback required for accessory buildings when rear yard adjoins side yard of abutting lot.  [4] ;hg;Or height of principal building, whichever is less.  


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.31), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 27-102—27-111. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. COURTYARD HOUSING
Sec. 27-112. Lot and building regulations—RSA and RM Districts.
Courtyard housing is allowed in all RSA and RM districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 2-8 (see also figure 2-6). 


[1] Or height of principal building, whichever is less.  


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.32), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 27-113—27-132. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADUs)
Sec. 27-133. In general.
(a)	Where allowed. ADUs are allowed only on lots occupied by a detached house. ADUs must be secondary and subordinate to the principal dwelling unit of the subject property. 
(b)	Zoning district regulations. ADUs are subject to all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which they are located, unless otherwise expressly stated in this chapter. 
(c)	Number. No more than one DADU and one AADU is permitted on a single lot. 
(d)	Size. The total square footage of all ADUs on a single lot cannot exceed 50 percent of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling unit, or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(e)	Number of residents. The total number of residents that reside on the subject property may not exceed the number permitted for a single household. 
(f)	Parking. No additional parking is required for an ADU. Any provided parking is subject to the same regulations that apply to the principal dwelling unit. 
(g)	Owner occupancy and rental. At least one of the dwelling units on a lot occupied by an ADU shall be occupied by an owner with at least a 50 percent interest in the subject property. The owner shall occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the ADU as their permanent residence for a majority of the time each calendar year, and at no time receive rent for the owner-occupied unit. ADUs may not be rented for periods of less than 90 consecutive days. Application for a building permit for an ADU must include a sworn, notarized statement from the property owner stating that the owner will occupy one of the dwelling units on the premises, except for bona fide temporary absences. 
(h)	Home occupation. No business activity is permitted in the accessory dwelling unit unless it meets the requirements of a home occupation. 
(i)	Impervious coverage. To help implement the affordable housing initiatives recommended in the comprehensive plan, residential properties with a detached ADU shall be eligible for an increased as-of-right impervious coverage bonus of five percent of the total lot area. DADUs eligible for this credit must have a bedroom, full kitchen facilities, and bathroom. 
(j)	Nonconforming lots and structures.
(1)	ADUs may be constructed on a nonconforming lot with a detached single-family house subject to compliance with all applicable setback and building regulations (e.g., coverage, height, floor area, etc.). 
(2)	Non-conforming and enclosed accessory structures that exist on the effective date specified, December 19, 2023, but that do not comply with the regulations of this article may be converted to an ADU so long as the modification does not result in the structure exceeding the extent of noncompliance with the regulations of this article (article 2 of chapter 27). 
(Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, 12-19-2023)
Sec. 27-134. Attached accessory dwelling units (AADUS).
(a)	Description. Attached accessory dwelling units (AADUs), formerly referred to as secondary suites, are contained wholly within the principal dwelling unit on the property (i.e., detached house). 
(b)	Applicability. All AADUs are subject to compliance with the regulations of this section. 
(c)	Creation. AADUs may be created by: 
(1)	Converting existing floor area within the interior of a detached house (e.g., attic or basement) to an accessory dwelling unit; 
(2)	Adding floor area to an existing detached house to accommodate an accessory dwelling unit; or 
(3)	Constructing a new detached house that includes an accessory dwelling unit within the principal building. 
(d)	Location of entrances. Only one entrance to a detached house containing an AADU may be located on a facade that faces a street, unless the detached house had an additional street-facing entrance before the AADU was created. 
(Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, 12-19-2023)
Sec. 27-135. Detached accessory dwelling units (DADUS).
(a)	Description. Detached accessory dwelling units (DADUs) are free standing structures that are entirely separated from the principal dwelling unit on the property (i.e., detached house). 
(b)	Applicability. All DADUs are subject to compliance with the regulations of this section and with the lot and building regulations of table 2-9. 


[1] Plus 15 feet if abutting arterial street.  [2] ;hg;Minimum 20-foot rear setback required for accessory buildings when rear yard adjoins side yard of abutting lot.  [3] ;hg;Or height and number of stories of principal building, whichever is less.  
(Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, 12-19-2023)
Secs. 27-136—27-144. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. CIVIC BUILDINGS
Sec. 27-145. Lot and building regulations—R Districts.
Civic buildings, which may be occupied only by allowed public and civic uses, are allowed in all R districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of Table 2-10 (see also Figure 2-7). 


[1] Plus 15 feet if abutting arterial street.  [2] ;hg;Plus 20 feet if abutting arterial street.  [3] ;hg;Plus 30 feet if abutting arterial street.  [4] ;hg;Minimum 25-foot rear setback required for accessory buildings when rear yard adjoins side yard of abutting lot.  [5] ;hg;Or height of principal building, whichever is less.  


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.35), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 27-146—27-155. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. GARAGES
Sec. 27-156. Applicability.
The regulations of this section apply to garages on lots occupied by detached houses, attached houses or two-flats. The regulations also apply to carports. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.36), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-157. Detached houses and two-flats.
(a)	Garage configurations allowed. Garages for detached houses and two-flats may be rear-loaded, side-loaded or front-loaded, in accordance with the regulations of this section. 
(b)	Rear-loaded garages. Rear-loaded garages may be attached or detached, with the vehicle entrance generally oriented to the rear of the lot. Rear-loaded detached garages shall be set back at least three feet from the alley right-of-way. 
(c)	Side-loaded garages. Side-loaded garages may be attached or detached, with the vehicle entrance generally oriented perpendicular to the front wall plane of the principal building. Side-loaded garages may be accessed by a driveway leading from a side street or from the front street. Vehicle entrances to all side street-loaded garages shall be setback at least 20 feet from the street right-of-way. 
(d)	Front-loaded garages. Vehicle entrances to all front-loaded garages shall be setback at least 20 feet from the street right-of-way. Front-loaded garages that exceed 50 percent of the width of the dwelling unit shall not have garage doors that are wider than 13 feet. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.37), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2019-11-03, § I(Attch.), 11-26-19)
Sec. 27-158. Attached houses.
(a)	Garage configurations allowed. Garages for attached houses on lots abutting arterial streets shall be rear-loaded, in accordance with the regulations of this section. Garages for attached houses on lots abutting non-arterial streets may be rear-loaded, side-loaded or front-loaded, in accordance with the regulations of this section. 
(b)	Rear-loaded garages. Rear-loaded garages may be attached or detached, with the vehicle entrance generally oriented to the rear of the lot. Rear-loaded detached garages shall be set back at least three feet from the alley right-of-way. 
(c)	Front- and side street-loaded garages.
(1)	Front-loaded garage entrances shall be recessed at least 12 inches behind the front wall plane of the principal building or be located beneath a second-story building that projects at least 12 inches forward of the garage entrance. 
(2)	Front-loaded garages that exceed 50 percent of the width of the dwelling unit shall not have garage doors that are wider than 13 feet. 
(3)	Vehicle entrances to all front and side street-loaded garages shall be setback at least 20 feet from the street right-of-way. 
(4)	When garages are paired (abutting), driveways shall be combined and centered on the property line between attached house dwelling units. In all cases, driveways serving front-or side street-loaded attached house garages shall be designed to ensure at least 25 feet of uninterrupted curb length between single or paired driveways. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.38), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2019-11-03, § I(Attch.), 11-26-2019)
Sec. 27-159. Exceptions.
Garages and carports that exist on the effective date specified in section 27-4 but that do not comply with the regulations of this division (division 9 of this article), may be modified, reconstructed or replaced as long as the modification, reconstruction or replacement does not result in the garage or carport exceeding the extent of noncompliance with the garage regulations of this division (division 9 of this article). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.39), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 27-160—27-189. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. MIXED-USE DISTRICTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 27-190. District list.
The city's mixed-use zoning districts are listed in table 3-1. Whenever this zoning ordinance refers to "mixed-use" or "X" zoning districts, it is referring to these districts. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.40), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-191. District descriptions.
(a)	General. Mixed-use zoning districts are primarily intended to create, maintain and promote walkable mixed-use development patterns. 
(b)	MX1 district. The MX1 district is primarily intended to accommodate small, neighborhood-scale mixed use-buildings. 
(c)	MX2 district. The MX2 district is primarily intended to accommodate mixed-use buildings in mixed-use corridors and nodes. 
(d)	CX district. The CX district is primarily intended to accommodate mixed-use and general buildings in commercial corridors. 
(e)	EX district. The EX district is primarily intended to accommodate general buildings and workspace buildings in office and industrial park settings. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.41), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-192. Use regulations.
Uses are allowed in X districts in accordance with the use regulations of article VII. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.42), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-193. Building types.
Allowed uses in X districts may occupy any building type allowed in the subject zoning district, as indicated in table 3-2. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.43), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-194. Generally applicable regulations.
(a)	Accessory uses and structures. See article VII. 
(b)	Parking and garages. See article VIII. 
(c)	Landscaping and screening. See article IX. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.44), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-195—27-204. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. COMMERCIAL HOUSES
Sec. 27-205. Lot and building regulations.
Commercial houses are allowed in all MX1 and MX2 districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 3-3 (see also figure 3-1). 


[1] Street-facing garage entries must be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the street right-of-way, whichever results in a greater setback.  


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.45), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 27-206—27-215. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. SHOPFRONT BUILDINGS
Sec. 27-216. Lot and building regulations.
Shopfront buildings are allowed in MX1, MX2 and CX districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 3-4. 


[1] Street-facing garage entries must be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the street right-of-way, whichever results in a greater setback.  [2] ;hg;Buildings on O-1 or M-zoned lots located within the Buford Highway Overlay may be eligible for increased as-of-right building height, in accordance with Article V, Division 2. Outside the Buford Highway Overlay, greater building heights may be approved through the special land use permit procedures of Article X, Division 3.  [3] ;hg;Or height of principal building, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.46), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-217—27-226. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. GENERAL BUILDINGS
Sec. 27-227. Lot and building regulations.
General buildings are allowed in CX and EX districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 3-5. 


[1] Street-facing garage entries must be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the street right-of-way, whichever results in a greater setback.  [2] Buildings on O-1 or M-zoned lots located within the Buford Highway Overlay may be eligible for increased as-of-right building height, in accordance with Article V, Division 2. Outside the Buford Highway Overlay, greater building heights may be approved through the special land use permit procedures of Article X, Division 3.  [3] Or height of principal building, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.47), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-228—27-237. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. WORKSPACE BUILDINGS
Sec. 27-238. Lot and building regulations.
Workspace buildings are allowed in EX districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 3-6. 


[1] Street-facing garage entries must be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the street right-of-way, whichever results in a greater setback.  [2] Buildings on O-1 or M-zoned lots located within the Buford Highway Overlay may be eligible for increased as-of-right building height, in accordance with Article V, Division 2. Outside the Buford Highway Overlay, greater building heights may be approved through the special land use permit procedures of Article X, Division 3.  [3] Or height of principal building, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.48), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-239—27-248. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. CIVIC BUILDINGS
Sec. 27-249. Lot and building regulations.
Civic buildings, which may be occupied only by allowed public and civic uses, are allowed in all X districts, subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of table 3-7 (see also figure 3-2). 


[1] Street-facing garage entries must be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or from the street right-of-way, whichever results in a greater setback.  [2] Or height of principal building, whichever is less. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.49), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-250—27-259. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. COMMERCIAL AND EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 27-260. District list.
The city's commercial and employment zoning districts are listed in table 4-1. Whenever this zoning ordinance refers to "commercial" zoning districts or "employment" zoning districts, it is referring to these districts. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.50), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-261. District descriptions.
(a)	NS, Neighborhood Shopping district. The NS district is primarily intended to accommodate small- to moderate-scale retail and service uses that serve surrounding neighborhoods. 
(b)	C-1, Local Commercial. The C-1 district is primarily intended to accommodate retail and service uses that serve multiple neighborhood areas. 
(c)	C-2, General Commercial district. The C-2 district is primarily intended to accommodate retail and service uses with a citywide or larger market area. 
(d)	O-I, Office-Institution district. The O-I district is primarily intended to accommodate public, civic, institutional and office uses, as well as supporting retail and service uses. 
(e)	O-D, Office-Distribution district. The O-D district is primarily intended to accommodate office, warehouse and distribution uses. 
(f)	O-C-R, Office-Commercial-Residential district. The O-C-R district is primarily intended to accommodate office, retail, service and residential uses and to promote reuse of existing buildings. 
(g)	M, Industrial district. The M district is primarily intended to provide areas suitable for manufacturing, assembly, wholesaling, warehousing, and other industrial activities. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.51), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-262—27-271. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. USES
Sec. 27-272. Use regulations.
Uses are allowed in commercial and employment districts in accordance with the use regulations of article VII. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.52), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-273—27-282. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. BUILDING TYPES
Sec. 27-283. Allowed building types.
Allowed uses in commercial and employment districts may occupy any building type allowed in the subject zoning district, as indicated in table 4-2. 


[1] Multi-unit buildings are allowed in the O-I district, but only if approved in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of Article X, Division 3. 
[2] Multi-unit buildings are allowed in the C-1 district on properties located south of I-85. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.53), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-12-01, § I(Attch.), 12-10-2019)
Secs. 27-284—27-293. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Sec. 27-294. All allowed building types.
All allowed building types in commercial and employment districts are subject to the lot and building regulations of table 4-3, except that attached houses in the O-C-R district are subject to the same regulations that apply to attached houses in the RM district (see section 27-79). 


[1] As established by conditions imposed at time of rezoning or SLUP approval.  [2] As established by conditions imposed at time of rezoning or SLUP approval or 10 feet, whichever is greater.  [3] No interior side setback required abutting another commercial or employment district.  [4] As established by conditions imposed at time of rezoning or SLUP approval or 20 feet, whichever is greater.  [5] Minimum 25-foot rear setback required for accessory buildings when rear yard adjoins side yard of abutting R-zoned lot.  [6] Greater building heights may be approved through the special land use permit procedures of Article X, Division 3.  [7] Buildings on O-1 or M-zoned lots located within the Buford Highway Overlay may be eligible for increased as-of-right building height, in accordance with Article V, Division 2. Outside the Buford Highway Overlay, greater building heights may be approved through the special land use permit procedures of Article X, Division 3.  [8] Detached houses subject to maximum building height limit of 40 feet.  [9] Multi-unit, shopfront, and general buildings located on C-1 zoned lots south of I-85 may be up to eight stories in height. Parking decks accessory to such buildings may not exceed eight stories in height.  


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.54), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2019-12-01, § I(Attch.), 12-10-2019)
Secs. 27-295—27-324. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. GENERALLY APPLICABLE REGULATIONS
Sec. 27-325. Accessory uses and structures.
See article VII. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.55), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-326. Parking and garages.
See article VIII. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.56), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-327. Landscaping and screening.
See article VII. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.57), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-328—27-367. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 27-368. Purpose and intent.
As the name implies, overlay zoning districts "overlay" applicable base zoning district classifications to alter some or all of the base zoning regulations that apply to particular sites. Overlay districts work to modify or supplement the regulations imposed by base zoning district when necessary to address special situations or accomplish specific objectives. Overlay zoning is intended to be used when the base zoning applied to an area remains generally appropriate, but when an additional, modified or eliminated requirement could help implement the city's planning goals or address an area-specific planning, design or land use regulation issue. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.58), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-369. Interpretation.
(a)	All applicable regulations of the underlying base zoning district apply to property in an overlay district unless otherwise expressly stated in the overlay district regulations. 
(b)	When overlay regulations conflict with regulations that otherwise apply in the underlying base zoning district, the regulations of the applicable overlay govern. If property is classified in multiple overlay districts and the regulations of one overlay district conflict with the regulations of another overlay district, the more restrictive regulation governs. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.59), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-370. Procedure.
The boundaries of overlay zoning districts shall be shown on the official zoning map. The following procedures apply to the establishment, amendment or termination of all overlay districts unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(1)	Overlay district regulations shall be established, amended or terminated in accordance with the zoning ordinance text amendment procedures of article 10, division 2 of this chapter. 
(2)	Except as otherwise expressly stated, zoning map amendments establishing, expanding or reducing the boundaries of an overlay district or terminating all or part of an overlay district shall be processed in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of article 10, division 2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.60), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-371—27-380. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. /BHO, BUFORD HIGHWAY OVERLAY
Sec. 27-381. Scope.
This division establishes special regulations governing lots located within the boundaries of the /BHO (Buford Highway Overlay) district. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.61), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-382. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the /BHO district is to: 
(1)	Implement the policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan, the Peachtree Creek Greenway Master Plan and other adopted plans and studies for the Buford Highway area; 
(2)	Provide for connectivity of streets and communities, thereby promoting walkability, reducing dependence on automobile use and increasing ease of movement and opportunities for alternative modes of travel; 
(3)	Promote the provision of workforce housing; and 
(4)	Facilitate redevelopment of the area. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.62), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-383. Applicability.
The /BHO district regulations apply to all building and development activities within the overlay district boundaries that meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)	Require issuance of a land disturbance permit; 
(2)	Create a new driveway on a public street; 
(3)	Add eight or more off-street vehicle parking spaces on the subject site; 
(4)	Result in structural improvements to existing buildings that exceed 25 percent of the county tax assessor's total assessed value of the existing improvements on the subject property, including the value of all structural improvements added over the previous 12-month period; 
(5)	Add new principal buildings or additions to existing principal buildings that increase the floor area of on the subject site by more than ten percent, including the total gross floor area added over the previous 12-month period; or 
(6)	A change in use or method of operation that results in a 20 percent or greater increase in traffic generation potential (from current use to proposed use), based on average daily and peak-hour traffic generation data published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.63), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-384. Streets.
(a)	Public and private streets shall comply with the requirements or public streets found in chapter 14 and other applicable sections of the city code. 
(b)	All new streets shall connect at least two public streets or provide a temporary street stub that will allow for a future connection between at least two public streets. This provision is not intended to require or prohibit connections to streets that are located entirely outside the boundaries of the Buford Highway Overlay district. 
(c)	When blocks are subdivided by new streets, the maximum perimeter length of resulting new blocks may not exceed 2,000 linear feet, measured from street centerline to street centerline. 
(d)	The maximum allowed curb radius at any intersection or curb cut is 20 feet. 
(e)	New curb cuts are prohibited on Buford Highway, Druid Hills Road or Briarcliff Road if the subject lot has access to another (non-primary) street. On lots without access to a non-primary street, a maximum of one curb cut is allowed from the abutting primary street, provided that lots with more than 700 linear feet of frontage on a primary street are allowed a maximum of one curb cut per 700 linear feet of primary street frontage, or fraction thereof. 
(f)	Lots with access solely to a non-primary street are allowed a maximum of two curb cuts on such street. Lots with access to more than one non-primary street are allowed a maximum of one curb cut per street. 
(g)	Curb cuts may not exceed 24 feet in width. The community development director is authorized to approve an administrative variance to allow greater width curb cuts when greater driveway widths are required by the fire marshal. 
(h)	Access driveways shall be perpendicular to the abutting street. Circular and non-perpendicular access driveways are prohibited. 
(i)	Gates and security arms may not cross or encroach upon any public street or sidewalk. 
(j)	The following provisions apply to lots that abut a right-of-way controlled by the State of Georgia: 
(1)	All improvements within the right-of-way and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access to the right-of-way shall comply with of the Georgia Department of Transportation requirements; and 
(2)	An approved permit for proposed access or improvements is required from the Georgia Department of Transportation and shall be incorporated into the construction drawings for the project before the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.64), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-385. Streetscapes.
(a)	Streetscape improvements, multi-use trails and other pedestrian facilities shall be provided along all street frontages within the boundaries of the /BHO district in accordance with the regulations of this section. All bicycle and pedestrian facilities shall comply with the most recent version of the Bicycle, Pedestrian and Trail Plan.
(b)	Streetscapes shall consist of two parts: a landscape zone and a pedestrian zone. 
(1)	The landscape zone starts at the back of the curb and extends inward (toward the lot) for the minimum distance and no more than the maximum distance indicated in table 5-1. This area is generally intended to accommodate trees, plants, street furniture, lights, trash receptacles and similar streetscape elements. 
(2)	The pedestrian zone starts at the inner edge of the landscape zone and extends inward (toward the lot) for the minimum distance and no more than the maximum distance indicated in table 5-1. This area, typically referred to as the "sidewalk," is intended exclusively to accommodate unimpeded pedestrian movement. The pedestrian zone may also be used to accommodate multi-use trails when the zone is at least ten feet in width. 
(c)	The minimum width of required streetscapes varies by street type, in accordance with table 5-1. 


(d)	On existing streets with insufficient right-of-way width to accommodate the required streetscape elements, the right-of-way needed to accommodate the required streetscape elements may be expanded by mutual agreement between the owner of the abutting property and the entity controlling the subject right-of-way, or a public access easement may be provided to the city to accommodate the required streetscape elements. 
(e)	Landscape zones. 
(1)	Overstory trees shall be planted in all landscape zones spaced at a maximum distance of 30 feet on center or as approved by the city arborist. 
(2)	New overstory trees shall be a minimum of three and one-half inches in caliper measured 12 inches above ground, shall be a minimum of 16 feet in height, shall have a minimum mature height of 30 feet and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of eight feet. 
(3)	Overstory trees shall have a minimum planting area of four feet by eight feet. Tree planting areas shall provide porous drainage systems that allow for drainage of the planting area. 
(4)	Overstory tree species shall be consistent for the entire length of the subject block face. Species are permitted to change on individual block faces only in cases of limited supply and/or concerns regarding disease or the health of existing and proposed trees. Such changes require review and approval by the community development director, after consultation with a certified arborist. 
(5)	All planting and plant removal activity within required landscape zones, other than routine maintenance, requires review and approval by the community development director. 
(6)	Street lights shall be located within the landscape zone spaced at a maximum distance of 60 feet on center on the following streets: Buford Highway, North Druid Hills Rd., Briarcliff Rd., Clairmont Rd., Briarwood Rd. and Cliff Valley Way. 
(7)	Benches, trash receptacles, and bike racks shall be placed within the landscape zone on the following streets: Buford Highway, North Druid Hills Road, Briarcliff Road, Clairmont Road, Briarwood Road and Cliff Valley Way. Such features shall be provided at a ratio of not less than one bench, one trash receptacle, and one bike rack per 300 feet of street frontage, or portion thereof. Bike racks provided to meet this requirement may be counted towards satisfying bicycle parking requirements of this chapter. These streetscape elements may incorporate functional art and should include trash recycle containers similar to BigBelly that can incorporate art and graphic displays while contributing to the City's sustainability goals. Developers shall work collaboratively with the community development director or their designee and the ACC which will provide assistance and guidance regarding appropriate elements and which can offer a list of artists and others who are available for collaboration on art elements. This process shall run concurrently with the standard permitting process. 
(8)	Landscape zones shall be planted with grass, ground cover or flowering plants, or consist of brick pavers, concrete pavers, or granite pavers where on-street parking is provided or pedestrian crossing and/or congregation is likely. Applicants are encouraged to incorporate green design considerations and eco-art into landscaping and drainage designs wherever possible. Many times, these requirements add only insignificant cost to a project as they simply require looking at standard engineering and landscape design through a design/art lens. 
(f)	Pedestrian zones. 
(1)	Pedestrian zones shall be paved in concrete and kept clear and unobstructed for the safe and convenient use of pedestrians. For all internal (privately-owned) sidewalk paving, the ACC and the community development director or designee shall work with the developer to provide assistance for incorporating arts elements such as sidewalk poetry or artwork that may be incorporated into final installations. This assistance can include: 
a.	Offering design suggestions and best practices information. 
b.	Providing an open source list of local artists, artisans, and fabricators who may be engaged by the developer to meet these requirements. 
c.	Reviewing developer concepts to offer feedback and guidance. 
d.	Coordination with other city departments that may have jurisdiction to ensure that all requirements are in alignment and do not delay the permitting process. 
(2)	All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway at the same prevailing grade and cross slope as on the adjacent pedestrian zone area. 
(3)	Pedestrian zones paved with materials other than concrete may be allowed with the approval of the community development director. 
(4)	When newly constructed sidewalks abut existing adjacent sidewalks located within the boundaries of the /BHO district, the newly constructed sidewalk shall provide safe facilitation of pedestrian traffic flow to adjacent sidewalks. When newly constructed sidewalks abut existing adjacent sidewalks that are not located within the boundaries of the /BHO district, the newly constructed sidewalk shall provide safe facilitation of pedestrian traffic flow to adjacent sidewalks by tapering to match the width of the existing sidewalks, except if no adjacent sidewalk exists, the new sidewalk shall taper to match the widths identified in section 14-677 of the city code. Any development that disturbs existing sidewalks on an adjacent property shall replace disturbed areas to their pre-disturbance state and condition. 
(5)	Safe and convenient pedestrian pathways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each publicly accessible building entrance, including pedestrian access routes to parking decks and through parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. All such pathways shall be paved, with a minimum width of three feet or the width required by the underlying zoning district or ADA accessibility criteria, whichever width is greater. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.65), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2022-05-03, § I, 5-24-2022; Ord. No. RZ-2022-12-03, § I, 12-13-2022)
Sec. 27-386. Workforce housing incentives.
(a)	Developers shall be entitled (as of right) to one additional story of building height for each ten percent of workforce housing units provided in excess of any applicable mandatory minimum requirements. Bonus height may exceed the maximum applicable building height limit of the underlying zoning district but may not exceed the maximum height limits established pursuant to section 27-388. 
(b)	The planning commission is authorized to recommend and the city council is authorized to approve other incentives to projects that exceed applicable mandatory minimums, including fee waivers, expedited permitting and financial assistance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.66), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-387. Peachtree Creek Greenway.
(a)	The provisions of this section are intended to protect and enhance the Peachtree Creek Greenway, which is a major public investment and recreational amenity within the Buford Highway area. 
(b)	Service, loading and outdoor storage areas on lots abutting the Peachtree Creek Greenway shall be screened in accordance with section 27-928. The screening required from R-zoned lots and public rights-of-way shall also be provided from the Greenway trail. Walls, fences and landscape screens may have breaks or openings to allow for access to the greenway trail. 
(c)	New development is encouraged to have PCG facing uses and to provide connections to existing access points to the greenway. Public art and signage are encouraged in areas that abut or face the PCG. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.67), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2022-05-03, § I, 5-24-2022)
Sec. 27-388. Building heights and density.
(a)	Hospitals, medical office and health service buildings, general office and hotels on O-I, OCR, M or X-zoned lots located south of I-85 within the boundaries of the /BHO district may be up to 20 stories in height. Residential buildings on O-I, OCR, or X-zoned lots located south of I-85 within the boundaries of the /BHO district may be up to eight stories in height. Parking decks accessory to such uses may not exceed eight stories in height. All other buildings are subject to the regulations of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	To help implement the development intensities recommended in the Buford Highway Corridor Character Area of the comprehensive plan, buildings on properties within the /BHO district may exceed the maximum applicable building height limit of the underlying zoning district if approved through the special land use permit procedures of article 10, division 3 of this chapter. This provision does not apply to the buildings and uses specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	To help implement the development intensities recommended in the Buford Highway Corridor Character Area of the comprehensive plan, residential and mixed-use buildings on properties within the /BHO district may exceed the maximum applicable density limit of the underlying zoning district if approved through the special and use permit procedures of article 10, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.68), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2019-07-01, I(Attch.), 7-23-2019)
Sec. 27-389. Utilities.
(a)	Purpose and intent. It is the intent and purpose of this section to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens as well as the aesthetics and quality of life of the City of Brookhaven by the establishment, herein, of standards and procedures for burying of existing overhead utilities as new developments are constructed and where significant redevelopment occurs. This section, therefore, establishes minimum requirements for placement of overhead utilities underground. While there are considerations to balance difficulties of urban development with the desires of the city, where questions of intent arise the purpose of this section is to ensure that said utilities are in fact buried in the majority of instances. 
(b)	Applicability. Utilities, including telephone, electric power, and cable television in both public and private rights-of-way, shall be placed underground for all new developments with total floor areas exceeding 10,000 gross square feet, except when extreme conditions of underlying rock or other conditions prevent this requirement from being met or as provided in paragraph (b) below, and only as approved by the director. 
(c)	Exceptions. The following exceptions shall apply to this section: 
(1)	Underground utilities shall not be required for developments with total floor areas of 10,000 gross square feet or less. 
(2)	Transmission and main lines shall not be required to be placed underground. 
(3)	Accessory mechanical systems and features such as electric distribution, transformers, switchgear, meter pedestals, telephone pedestals, terminals and other similar equipment, which is normally installed above ground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution systems may be installed. 
(4)	Meters, service connections, and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the premises it serves may be installed. 
(5)	Overhead utility services for existing developments in place as of the effective date of this section may be repaired, replaced or increased in capacity. 
(6)	Temporary overhead facilities required for construction purposes will be permitted. 
(d)	Utility conversion fund. A city fund, known as the "The City of Brookhaven Utility Conversion Fund" is hereby created. The purpose of said fund is to accept deposits as described in paragraph (d) below, along with other funds or grants apportioned by the mayor and city council, and the use of such funds shall be restricted for the sole purpose of offsetting the cost of projects undertaken by the city to bury or relocate power lines from streets and sidewalks. 
(e)	Fee-in-lieu. In cases where the expense to bury overhead utilities for new developments described in paragraph (a), above, is deemed to be unreasonably costly due to the complexity of the work, the developer may request approval from the director of a fee-in-lieu arrangement, whereby the developer shall make a contribution toward the City's Utility Conversion Fund in lieu of requiring burial of the utilities. Such fee-in-lieu arrangement shall be based on a cost per linear foot of such underground relocation of utilities established by the mayor and city council, as may be adjusted from time to time by city ordinance. 
(f)	Accessory mechanical systems and features. Accessory mechanical systems, including utility meters, boxes, HVAC units, and other similar equipment shall not be located between the building and a public or private right-of-way. Efforts shall be taken to locate accessory mechanical system features including utility meters, boxes and other similar equipment so as to not be visible from the public or private right-of-way. When this is not possible or satisfied, as determined by the director, the following screening shall be required: 
(1)	Roof-mounted systems. Roof-mounted systems shall be screened with an opaque wall constructed of materials similar to the primary building. 
(2)	All other systems. Systems mounted on walls, ground, or elsewhere, shall be screened with an opaque wall constructed of materials similar to the primary building or sufficient landscaping to provide year-round screening. 
(g)	Waiver of utility provisions. 
(1)	The director may waive one or more of the requirements of this article, provided that the director makes the following findings with respect to the utility service to which the waiver pertains: 
a.	That the property owner seeking the waiver has submitted justification of the waiver in writing; 
b.	That two or more of the following criteria are met: 
1.	The city arborist has determined that the new or expanded utility service, if placed underground, would endanger an existing specimen tree by damaging its root system; 
2.	The new or expanded utility service, if placed overhead, would not be visible from a public or private street or any other public or private right-of-way; 
3.	The new or expanded overhead utility service, if placed underground, would significantly interfere with one or more existing city or private underground utilities; 
4.	If the waiver is granted, there would be a reduction in the total number of overhead utility service lines serving the owner's property; 
5.	If the waiver is granted, the length of the overhead utility service to the owner's property would be less than the length of the service in existence at the time the application is made; 
6.	The new, extended or relocated service or facility is required to provide additional street lighting to suppress criminal activity and that the waiver is requested or supported by the chief of police; and 
7.	The new, extended or relocated service or facility would require boring under a state route and is restricted by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(2)	Any property owner whose application for a waiver under this section has been denied by the director may appeal the director's decision to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed within 30 days of the director's denial. City council shall conduct a public hearing on any such appeal. In deciding the appeal, council shall determine whether good cause exists to grant the requested waiver; provided, that, in making this determination, council shall, in conjunction with an appeal involving a utility service, consider the decision factors set out above. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.69), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-10-08, § I(attch.), 10-27-2020)
Sec. 27-390. Open space.
(a)	Applicability. On-site open space shall be provided for development sites within the /BHO district except for those: 
(1)	Developed exclusively with single-family detached dwellings; and 
(2)	Sites located south of I-85. 
(b)	Minimum open space ratio. The minimum amount of on-site open space required is based on the size of the lot on which the use is located, as follows: 
(1)	On development sites with an area of less than one acre, at least ten percent of the development site shall be open space; and 
(2)	On development sites with an area of one acre or more, at least 15 percent of the development site shall be open space. 
(c)	General regulations. The general regulations of this subsection apply to open space provided to meet minimum open space ratios. 
(1)	Areas counted to meet the open space regulations of this section (section 27-390) shall be provided in the form of amenity spaces, plazas, pocket parks or parks that comply with the applicable regulations of this section. Street rights-of-way, parking lots, outdoor dining areas, transition buffers, landscape strips and other areas that do not comply with applicable open space regulations may not be counted toward satisfying open space ratios. 
(2)	No buildings may be located in open spaces unless expressly stated in this section. 
(3)	Unless otherwise expressly stated in this section, open spaces shall be open to general public access during daylight hours and shall be directly accessible from a public sidewalk. 
(4)	Open spaces shall be at-grade, unless otherwise expressly stated in this section. 
(5)	No individual open space may traverse a street or rail right-of-way unless located on a bridge over such right-of-way that conforms to the minimum dimensional requirements of the subject open space type. 
(6)	When a building or individual ground-story commercial establishment adjoins an open space, pedestrian access (both ingress and egress), operable to residents or customers, shall be provided. 
(7)	Stormwater management practices, such as normally dry storage and retention facilities or ponds that retain water, may be integrated into open spaces, subject to the following: 
a.	Stormwater features in open space shall be designed by a qualified professional as formal or natural amenities with additional uses other than stormwater management, such as an amphitheater, sports field, or a pond or pool as part of the landscape design. It is strongly encouraged to consider eco-art landscape design principles for the design of these features. 
b.	Stormwater features may not be fenced or enclosed by retaining walls over 30 inches in height. 
(8)	Trees used to satisfy minimum open space requirements shall: 
a.	Be at least three and one-half inches in caliper size (measured 12 inches above the ground); 
b.	Be at least 16 feet in height at time of planting, with a minimum mature height of 30 feet; 
c.	Be spaced at least 25 feet on-center; and 
d.	Limbed up to a height of at least eight feet. 
(9)	All open space requirements shall be fully met before issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development. 
(10)	Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership of all open spaces, the method of and responsibility for maintenance, taxes and insurance, compulsory membership and assessment provisions, and shall be incorporated into legal instruments sufficient to ensure that the open space requirements of this section are maintained. Such arrangements shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(d)	Open space types. 
(1)	Amenity space. The amenity space open space type is intended to provide small covered or uncovered, unenclosed, outdoor areas on development sites of less than one acre. Amenity spaces are limited to at-grade hardscape or landscape areas improved for pedestrian enjoyment; rooftop decks; patios and porches; balconies; or yards, lawns, and gardens. Interior or exterior stairs or elevators may provide access to rooftop decks, patios, porches, and balconies. They are further subject to compliance with the criteria of table 5-2. 


(2)	Plaza. The plaza open space type is intended to provide an open space, available for civic purposes and commercial activities. A plaza shall be spatially defined by buildings or streets at its edges. Plazas are subject to the regulations of table 5-3. 


(3)	Pocket park. The pocket park open space type is intended to provide an open space for unstructured recreation. A pocket park may be spatially defined by buildings or streets at its edges. Pocket parks are subject to the regulations of table 5-4. 


(4)	Park. The park open space type is intended to provide an open space available for structured or unstructured recreation. A park may be independent of surrounding buildings at its edges. Parks are subject to the regulations of table 5-5. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.70), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2022-05-03, § I, 5-24-2022; Ord. No. RZ-2022-12-03, § I, 12-13-2022)
Secs. 27-391—27-400. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. /PRO, PEACHTREE ROAD OVERLAY
Sec. 27-401. Scope.
This division establishes streetscape and access regulations for development within the boundaries of the Peachtree Road Overlay (/PRO) District. The overlay district is based upon the vision developed as part of the Brookhaven-Peachtree Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) plan. The LCI plan created a community vision and action plan for the development of a more dynamic mixed-use community with the character of a multistory, urban village surrounding the Brookhaven-Oglethorpe University MARTA Transit Station and the Peachtree Road corridor from Fulton County to Ashford-Dunwoody Road. Key goals of the LCI plan include support for a high-quality, multi-modal transportation system featuring spacious, tree-lined sidewalks, bicycle infrastructure, an interconnected street network and limitations on driveway access. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.71), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-402. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the /PRO district is as follows: 
(1)	To implement the policies and objectives of the LCI plan, the comprehensive plan, Brookhaven City Centre Master plan and this zoning ordinance; 
(2)	To facilitate access to: 
a.	The Brookhaven-Oglethorpe University MARTA Transit Station; and 
b.	Compatible and neighboring commercial, civic, recreational, institutional and residential areas; and 
(3)	To provide for connectivity of streets and communities, thereby promoting walkability, reducing dependence on automobile use and increasing ease of movement and opportunities for alternative modes of travel. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.72), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-05, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-403. Applicability.
The /PRO district regulations apply to all building and development activities within the overlay district boundaries that meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)	Require issuance of a land disturbance permit; 
(2)	Create a new driveway on a public street; 
(3)	Add eight or more off-street vehicle parking spaces on the subject site; 
(4)	Result in structural improvements to existing buildings that exceed 25 percent of the county tax assessor's total assessed value of the existing improvements on the subject property, including the value of all structural improvements added over the previous 12-month period; 
(5)	Add new principal buildings or additions to existing principal buildings that increase the floor area of on the subject site by more than ten percent, including the total gross floor area added over the previous 12-month period; or 
(6)	A change in use or method of operation that results in a 20 percent or greater increase in traffic generation potential (from current use to proposed use), based on average daily and peak-hour traffic generation data published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.73), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-404. Reserved.
Sec. 27-405. Streets.
(a)	Public and private streets shall comply with the requirements for public streets found in chapter 14 and other applicable sections of the city code. Crosswalks on Dresden Drive and Apple Valley Road shall be "art" crosswalks and the community development department shall assist the developer on coordinating design, to the standards of the ACC. 
(b)	All new streets shall connect at least two public streets or provide a temporary street stub that will allow for a future connection between at least two public streets. This provision is not intended to require connections to streets that are located entirely outside the boundaries of the /PRO district. 
(c)	When blocks are subdivided by new streets, the maximum perimeter length of resulting new blocks may not exceed 2,000 linear feet, measured from street centerline to street centerline. 
(d)	The maximum allowed curb radius at any intersection or curb cut is 20 feet. 
(e)	No curb cuts are allowed on Peachtree Road or Apple Valley Road (primary streets) if the subject lot has access to another (non-primary) street. On lots without access to a non-primary street, a maximum of one curb cut is allowed from the abutting primary street, provided that lots with more than 700 linear feet of frontage on a primary street are allowed a maximum of one curb cut per 700 linear feet of primary street frontage, or fraction thereof. 
(f)	Lots with access solely to a non-primary street are allowed a maximum of two curb cuts on such street. Lots with access to more than one non-primary street are allowed a maximum of one curb cut per street. 
(g)	Curb cuts may not exceed 24 feet in width. The community development director is authorized to approve an administrative variance to allow greater width curb cuts when greater driveway widths are required by the fire marshal. 
(h)	Access driveways shall be perpendicular to the abutting street. Circular and non-perpendicular access driveways are prohibited. 
(i)	Gates and security arms may not cross or encroach upon any public street or sidewalk. 
(j)	The following provisions apply to lots that abut a right-of-way controlled by the State of Georgia: 
(1)	All improvements within the right-of-way and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access to the right-of-way shall comply with of the Georgia Department of Transportation requirements; and 
(2)	An approved permit for proposed access or improvements is required from the Georgia Department of Transportation and shall be incorporated into the construction drawings for the project before the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.75), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2022-05-03, § I, 5-24-2022)
Sec. 27-406. Streetscapes.
(a)	Streetscape improvements, multi-use trails and other pedestrian facilities shall be provided along all street frontages within the boundaries of the /PRO district in accordance with the regulations of this section. All bicycle and pedestrian facilities shall comply with the most recent version of the Bicycle, Pedestrian and Trail Plan.
(b)	Streetscapes shall consist of two parts: a landscape zone and a pedestrian zone. 
(1)	The landscape zone starts at the back of the curb and extends inward (toward the lot) for the minimum distance and no more than the maximum distance indicated in table 5-6. This area is generally intended to accommodate trees, plants, street furniture, lights, trash receptacles and similar streetscape elements. 
(2)	The pedestrian zone starts at the inner edge of the landscape zone and extends inward (toward the lot) for the minimum distance and no more than the maximum distance indicated in table 5-6. This area, typically referred to as the "sidewalk," is intended exclusively to accommodate unimpeded pedestrian movement. The pedestrian zone may also be used to accommodate multi-use trails when the zone is at least ten feet in width. 
(c)	The minimum width of required streetscapes varies by street type, in accordance with table 5-6. 


(e)	On existing streets with insufficient right-of-way width to accommodate the required streetscape elements, the right-of-way needed to accommodate the required streetscape elements may be expanded by mutual agreement between the owner of the abutting property and the entity controlling the subject right-of-way, or a public access easement may be provided to the city to accommodate the required streetscape elements. 
(f)	Landscape zones. 
(1)	Overstory trees shall be planted in all landscape zones spaced at a maximum distance of 30 feet on center or as approved by the city arborist. 
(2)	New overstory trees shall be a minimum of three and one-half inches in caliper measured 12 inches above ground, shall be a minimum of 16 feet in height, shall have a minimum mature height of 30 feet and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of eight feet. 
(3)	Overstory trees shall have a minimum planting area of four feet by eight feet. Tree planting areas shall provide porous drainage systems that allow for drainage of the planting area. 
(4)	Overstory tree species shall be consistent for the entire length of the subject block face. Species are permitted to change on individual block faces only in cases of limited supply and/or concerns regarding disease or the health of existing and proposed trees. Such changes require review and approval by the community development director, after consultation with a certified arborist. 
(5)	All planting and plant removal activity within required landscape zones, other than routine maintenance, requires review and approval by the community development director. 
(6)	Street lights shall be located within the landscape zone spaced at a maximum distance of 60 feet on center on the following streets: Peachtree Road, Dresden Drive, North Druid Hills Road and Apple Valley Road. 
(7)	Benches, trash receptacles, and bike racks shall be placed within the landscape zone on the following streets: Peachtree Road, Dresden Drive, North Druid Hills Road and Apple Valley Road. Such features shall be provided at a ratio of not less than one bench, one trash receptacle, and one bike rack per 300 feet of street frontage, or portion thereof. Bike racks provided to meet this requirement may be counted towards satisfying bicycle parking requirements of this chapter. Along Dresden Drive and Apple Valley Road, these streetscape elements shall incorporate functional art and should include trash recycle containers such as BigBelly or similar that can incorporate art and graphic displays while contributing to the city's sustainability goals. Developers shall work collaboratively with the community development director or designee and the ACC which will provide assistance and guidance regarding appropriate elements and which can offer a list of creatives and others who are available for collaboration on art elements. This process shall run concurrently with the standard permitting process. 
(8)	Landscape zones shall be planted with grass, ground cover or flowering plants, or consist of brick pavers, concrete pavers, or granite pavers where on-street parking is provided or pedestrian crossing and/or congregation is likely. Applicants are encouraged to incorporate green design considerations and eco-art into landscaping and drainage designs wherever possible. Many times, these requirements add only insignificant cost to a project as they simply require looking at standard engineering and landscape design through a design/art lens. 
(g)	Pedestrian zones. 
(1)	Pedestrian zones shall be paved in concrete and kept clear and unobstructed for the safe and convenient use of pedestrians. For all internal (privately-owned) sidewalk paving, the ACC and the community development director or designee shall work with the developer to provide assistance for incorporating arts elements such as sidewalk poetry or artwork that may be incorporated into final installations. This assistance can include: 
a.	Offering design suggestions and best practices information. 
b.	Providing an open source list of local artists, artisans, and fabricators who may be engaged by the developer to meet these requirements. 
c.	Reviewing developer concepts to offer feedback and guidance. 
d.	Coordination with other city departments that may have jurisdiction to ensure that all requirements are in alignment and do not delay the permitting process. 
(2)	All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway at the same prevailing grade and cross slope as on the adjacent pedestrian zone area. 
(3)	Pedestrian zones paved with materials other than concrete may be allowed with the approval of the community development director. 
(4)	When newly constructed sidewalks abut existing adjacent sidewalks located within the boundaries of the /PRO district, the newly constructed sidewalk shall provide safe facilitation of pedestrian traffic flow to adjacent sidewalks. When newly constructed sidewalks abut existing adjacent sidewalks that are not located within the boundaries of the / PRO district, the newly constructed sidewalk shall provide safe facilitation of pedestrian traffic flow to adjacent sidewalks by tapering to match the width of the existing sidewalks, except if no adjacent sidewalk exists, the new sidewalk shall taper to match the widths identified in section 14-677 of the city code. Any development that disturbs existing sidewalks on an adjacent property shall replace disturbed areas to their pre-disturbance state and condition. 
(5)	Safe and convenient pedestrian pathways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each publicly accessible building entrance, including pedestrian access routes to parking decks and through parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. All such pathways shall be paved, with a minimum width of three feet or the width required by the underlying zoning district or ADA accessibility criteria, whichever width is greater. 


(h)	Special provisions for RS zoning. The community development director or the director's designee is authorized to waive requirements for streetscape furnishing and amenities on RS-zoned lots occupied solely by single-family detached houses. The community development director is also authorized to reduce the required width of landscape and pedestrian zones on RS-zoned lots, provided that such reduction does not result in a landscape zone width of less than two feet or a pedestrian zone width of less than five feet. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.76), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2022-05-03, § I, 5-24-2022; Ord. No. RZ-2022-12-03, § I, 12-13-2022)
Sec. 27-407. Utilities.
(a)	Purpose and intent. It is the intent and purpose of this section to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens as well as the aesthetics and quality of life of the City of Brookhaven by the establishment, herein, of standards and procedures for burying of existing overhead utilities as new developments are constructed and where significant redevelopment occurs. This section, therefore, establishes minimum requirements for placement of overhead utilities underground. While there are considerations to balance difficulties of urban development with the desires of the city, where questions of intent arise the purpose of this section is to ensure that said utilities are in fact buried in the majority of instances. 
(b)	Applicability. Utilities, including telephone, electric power, and cable television in both public and private rights-of-way, shall be placed underground for all new developments with total floor areas exceeding 10,000 gross square feet, except when extreme conditions of underlying rock or other conditions prevent this requirement from being met or as provided in paragraph (b) below, and only as approved by the director. 
(c)	Exceptions. The following exceptions shall apply to this section: 
(1)	Underground utilities shall not be required for developments with total floor areas of 10,000 gross square feet or less. 
(2)	Transmission and main lines shall not be required to be placed underground. 
(3)	Accessory mechanical systems and features such as electric distribution, transformers, switchgear, meter pedestals, telephone pedestals, terminals and other similar equipment, which is normally installed above ground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution systems may be installed. 
(4)	Meters, service connections, and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the premises it serves may be installed. 
(5)	Overhead utility services for existing developments in place as of the effective date of this section may be repaired, replaced or increased in capacity. 
(6)	Temporary overhead facilities required for construction purposes will be permitted. 
(d)	Utility conversion fund. A city fund, known as the "The City of Brookhaven Utility Conversion Fund" is hereby created. The purpose of said fund is to accept deposits as described in paragraph (d) below, along with other funds or grants apportioned by the mayor and city council, and the use of such funds shall be restricted for the sole purpose of offsetting the cost of projects undertaken by the city to bury or relocate power lines from streets and sidewalks. 
(e)	Fee-in-lieu. In cases where the expense to bury overhead utilities for new developments described in paragraph (a), above, is deemed to be unreasonably costly due to the complexity of the work, the developer may request approval from the director of a fee-in-lieu arrangement, whereby the developer shall make a contribution toward the City's Utility Conversion Fund in lieu of requiring burial of the utilities. Such fee-in-lieu arrangement shall be based on a cost per linear foot of such underground relocation of utilities established by the mayor and city council, as may be adjusted from time to time by city ordinance. 
(f)	Accessory mechanical systems and features. Accessory mechanical systems, including utility meters, boxes, HVAC units, and other similar equipment shall not be located between the building and a public or private right-of-way. Efforts shall be taken to locate accessory mechanical system features including utility meters, boxes and other similar equipment so as to not be visible from the public or private right-of-way. When this is not possible or satisfied, as determined by the director, the following screening shall be required: 
(1)	Roof-mounted systems. Roof-mounted systems shall be screened with an opaque wall constructed of materials similar to the primary building. 
(2)	All other systems. Systems mounted on walls, ground, or elsewhere, shall be screened with an opaque wall constructed of materials similar to the primary building or sufficient landscaping to provide year-round screening. 
(g)	Waiver of utility provisions.
(1)	The director may waive one or more of the requirements of this article, provided that the director makes the following findings with respect to the utility service to which the waiver pertains: 
a.	That the property owner seeking the waiver has submitted justification of the waiver in writing; 
b.	That two or more of the following criteria are met: 
1.	The city arborist has determined that the new or expanded utility service, if placed underground, would endanger an existing specimen tree by damaging its root system; 
2.	The new or expanded utility service, if placed overhead, would not be visible from a public or private street or any other public or private right-of-way; 
3.	The new or expanded overhead utility service, if placed underground, would significantly interfere with one or more existing city or private underground utilities; 
4.	If the waiver is granted, there would be a reduction in the total number of overhead utility service lines serving the owner's property; 
5.	If the waiver is granted, the length of the overhead utility service to the owner's property would be less than the length of the service in existence at the time the application is made; 
6.	The new, extended or relocated service or facility is required to provide additional street lighting to suppress criminal activity and that the waiver is requested or supported by the chief of police; and 
7.	The new, extended or relocated service or facility would require boring under a state route and is restricted by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(2)	Any property owner whose application for a waiver under this section has been denied by the director may appeal the director's decision to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed within 30 days of the director's denial. City council shall conduct a public hearing on any such appeal. In deciding the appeal, council shall determine whether good cause exists to grant the requested waiver; provided, that, in making this determination, council shall, in conjunction with an appeal involving a utility service, consider the decision factors set out above. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.77), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-10-08, § I(attch.), 10-27-2020)
Secs. 27-408—27-417. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. /NCO, NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER OVERLAY
Sec. 27-418. General.
This division establishes the general authority and basic procedure for establishment of /NCO, Neighborhood Character Overlay districts. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.78), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-419. Purpose.
/NCO districts are intended to help address one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)	Protect the physical character of stable neighborhoods that exhibit unique development and building patterns; 
(2)	Foster development and redevelopment that are compatible with the scale and physical character of existing buildings through the use of development and design standards; 
(3)	Encourage neighborhood investment in the form of construction and development that conforms to the size, orientation and setting of existing buildings in the neighborhood; 
(4)	Serve as one possible method of implementing adopted small area plans or neighborhood plans. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.79), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-420. Selection criteria.
An /NCO district shall be a geographically defined area that has a significant concentration of sites that are united by physical development patterns or architecture. To be eligible for /NCO zoning, the area shall meet all of the following criteria: 
(1)	The area shall possess urban design, architectural or other physical development characteristics that create an identifiable setting, character and association; and 
(2)	The designated area shall be a contiguous area of at least five acres. Areas of less than five acres may be designated if they abut and extend an existing /NCO overlay district. 
(3)	Proposed regulations and overlay district boundaries shall be prepared following an inclusive, transparent process of public involvement that includes opportunities for affected property owners and residents to participate in the suggestion of district regulations or otherwise offer recommendations and provide input. The proposed regulations and overlay district boundaries shall then be reviewed by community development department staff who will perform an analysis and make a recommendation to the city council regarding the strengths and weaknesses of the proposed language. 
(4)	At the time of the public hearing to consider adoption of an overlay district, the applicant shall document the public involvement process used in preparing the proposed regulations and district boundaries, by providing at least the following information: 
a.	The opportunities provided for participation and input; 
b.	The types of information disseminated to affected residents, businesses and property owners and the methods of dissemination; 
c.	The level of participation by affected residents, businesses and property owners in meetings and discussions; and 
d.	The level of support shown by affected residents, businesses and property owners for the proposed regulations and overlay district boundaries. 
(4)	The final determination of the desirability of establishing a neighborhood character overlay district and the appropriate level of regulation rests solely with the city council. Should the council determine that such an overlay district is appropriate, it may utilize, in whole or in part, the proposed regulations and district boundaries, may modify either, or may choose to establish regulations and boundaries of its own choosing. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.80), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-421. Uses.
The use regulations of the underlying base zoning district apply in /NCO overlay districts, unless expressly modified by the adopted regulations of the specific neighborhood character overlay district. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.81), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-422. Development/design standards.
In establishing an /NCO overlay district, the city council is authorized to adopt district-specific development and design standards to guide development and redevelopment within the subject /NCO overlay district. When area-specific development and design standards have been adopted, each application for new construction or structural alteration of an existing building within the designated /NCO shall comply with those standards. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.82), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-423. Procedure.
(a)	Recommendations to establish an /NCO district shall be accompanied by a report containing the following information: 
(1)	Specific findings regarding the need for the proposed overlay and its consistency with the stated purpose of the /NCO district. 
(2)	Any recommended overlay-specific use, development or design regulations that will apply within the overlay and what actions (e.g., new development, building additions, change of use) will trigger compliance with those regulations. 
(3)	A description of public education and outreach activities undertaken to inform property owners, residents and tenants of the effect of proposed overlay regulations; 
(4)	A map showing the boundaries of the proposed overlay, including all lots included within the boundaries and identifying those owners of property within the proposed overlay who have indicated, in writing, their support or opposition to the overlay district text or map amendment. Property owners may submit their written indication of support or opposition at informal informational meetings, at public hearings, or by writing directly to the community development director or planning commission chair. The report and all other pertinent information shall be transmitted to the planning commission and city council before their public hearing and final action, respectively. 
(b)	Final decision-making authority to establish or amend a /NCO district rests solely with the city council within its legislative discretion. See also section 27-370. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.83), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-424—27-433. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. /AEO, AIRPORT ENVIRONS OVERLAY
Sec. 27-434. Scope.
This division establishes regulations and standards governing development, use, alteration, structures, and natural growth on lots located in whole or in part within the boundaries of the /AEO (Airport Environs Overlay) district. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.84), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-435. Purpose.
The purposes of the /AEO district are as follows: 
(1)	To protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons and the value of property in and near the DeKalb-Peachtree Airport; 
(2)	To provide for the safe and efficient operation of the airport; 
(3)	To help ensure the safety of fliers from hazards to air navigation; 
(4)	To help ensure compatibility between the airport and surrounding land uses; and 
(5)	To protect the airport from encroachment of incompatible uses, structures, and natural growth. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.85), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-436. Boundaries.
(a)	All of the land area within the boundaries of the DeKalb-Peachtree Airport and within one mile of the centerline extended of each instrument runway, for a distance of two and one-half miles from each end of such runway, is declared to be within the boundaries of the /AEO district. 
(b)	The /AEO district is further divided into three subdistricts, as follows: 
(1)	/AEO-1: From the end of the runway extending outward in a fan-shape to match the horizontal extent of the approach-departure clearance surface for a distance of 3,000 feet. 
(2)	/AEO-2: From the end of the /AEO-1 subdistrict to a point two and one-half miles from the end of the runway, extending in a fan-shaped fashion to match the horizontal extent of the approach-departure clearance surface. 
(3)	/AE-3: All of the /AEO district not included in an /AEO-1 or /AEO-2 subdistrict. 
(c)	The boundaries of the /AEO and its associated subdistricts are shown on map and are available for inspection during office hours in the offices of the community development department. 
(d)	Dimensions of imaginary surfaces as presented in subpart C of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR), Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace, are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.86), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-437. Applicability.
The /AEO district regulations of this division apply to each application for a permit for the development, use, or alteration of any structure, or natural growth when the subject property is located in whole or in part within the boundaries of the /AEO district. The regulations apply only to that portion of the subject property within the boundaries of the /AEO district. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.87), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-438. Height restrictions.
Except as otherwise expressly stated in this division, no obstructions to air navigation, structure or natural growth, may be erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained to such a height or in a manner so as to become an obstruction to air navigation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.88), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-439. Use restrictions.
(a)	The following uses and operations are prohibited within the /AEO district: 
(1)	Uses that results in electrical interference with radio communications between the airfield and aircraft; 
(2)	Uses that generate airborne smoke or dust into the atmosphere; 
(3)	Uses that make it difficult for fliers to distinguish between airfield lights and other lights; 
(4)	Uses that result in glare in the eyes of fliers using the airfield; 
(5)	Uses that impair visibility in the vicinity of the airfield; 
(6)	Uses that attract birds; and 
(7)	Uses that otherwise endanger the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(b)	Within the /AEO-1 subdistrict, public assembly, restaurant, and educational classroom uses with a density of occupation greater than 25 persons per acre of land are prohibited. Other uses may be permitted provided they meet all requirements of this division and have received a special administrative permit from the community development department director. The application shall be forwarded to the director of the DeKalb County airport department within five days of receipt by the community development department. The director of the DeKalb County airport department shall return written comments to the community development department within 30 days of receipt of the application. Such comments shall indicate whether granting of the permit would constitute a hazard to air navigation. 
(c)	Within the /AEO-1 subdistrict, no new residential use may be established and no residential use may be continued after it has been discontinued for a period of 180 days unless a special administrative permit is issued by the community development department director. The application shall be forwarded to the director of the DeKalb County airport department within five days of its receipt by the community development department. The director of the DeKalb County airport department shall return written comments to the community development department within 30 days of receipt of the application. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.89), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-440. Permits.
(a)	Within /AEO-1, no material change may be made in the use of land, and no structure or natural growth may be materially erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established unless a permit for such activity has been approved by the community development director, after review by the director of the DeKalb County airport department. Each such application shall indicate the purpose for which the desired use, structure, or natural growth is intended, a boundary survey indicating the location of the property and the location, dimensions, and height above mean sea level of any new or altered structure or natural growth, and a written description of the manner in which the activity would comply with the regulations of this division. No such permit may be granted if the proposed activity would: 
(1)	Allow the establishment, creation, extension, or maintenance of a use that does not comply with applicable /AEO district regulations; or 
(2)	Permit a nonconforming use, structure, or natural growth to be made, become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation or become less compatible in use than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived or from the date when application for a permit is made. 
(b)	Within the /AEO district, no existing use, structure, or natural growth may be replaced, replanted, substantially altered, rebuilt, or allowed to become a greater hazard to air navigation, unless a permit for such activity has been approved by the community development director, after review by the director of the DeKalb County airport department. No such permit may be granted if the activity would: 
(1)	Allow the establishment, creation, extension, or maintenance of or extend a use that does not comply with applicable /AEO regulations; or 
(2)	Permit a nonconforming use, structure, or natural growth to be made, become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation or become less compatible in use than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived or from the date when application for a permit is made. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.90), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-441. Marking of potential hazards.
Any permit or variance granted under the provisions of this division may be granted with the condition that the owner of the structure or natural growth in question install, operate, and maintain markers and lights that may be necessary to indicate to aircraft pilots the presence of a hazard to air navigation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.91), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-442—27-451. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 27-452. Purpose.
Like overlay zoning districts, special purpose zoning districts are tools for dealing with unique neighborhoods or settings or accomplishing special planning and zoning goals. Unlike overlay districts, however, special districts are base zoning classifications; they do not "over-lay" other base zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.92), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-453. Establishment.
Special purpose districts may be established, amended or removed only in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of article 10, division 2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.93), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-454—27-463. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PR, PEACHTREE ROAD DISTRICTS
Sec. 27-464. General.
(a)	The districts. The PR (Peachtree Road) districts are listed in table 6-1. References in this zoning ordinance to "Peachtree Road" districts or "PR" districts are references to these districts. 


(b)	Purposes. PR zoning districts are primarily intended to achieve the following purposes: 
(1)	Implement the policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan, the Brookhaven-Peachtree LCI plan, Brookhaven City Centre Master plan and the general purposes of this zoning ordinance; 
(2)	Promote a dynamic, mixed-use environment of appropriate intensity and scale near the Brookhaven-Oglethorpe University MARTA transit station; 
(3)	Promote overall, citywide land use balance; 
(4)	Provide for the efficient and effective use of land surrounding the Brookhaven-Oglethorpe University MARTA Transit Station and along Peachtree Road; 
(5)	Accommodate and promote a variety of housing types for residents of varying ages, incomes and lifestyle needs; 
(6)	Ensure that the design and arrangement of buildings, structures, streets and open spaces contribute to creation of an inviting, walkable, mid-rise, human-scale environment through regulations addressing such features as: 
a.	Consistent building setbacks; 
b.	Doorways, windows, building projections and building recesses; 
c.	Landscaping, lighting and street furniture to provide amenities and define the public realm; and 
d.	Building materials that promote a design and appearance compatible with the desired urban village character of the area. 
Improve pedestrian safety and comfort; 
Maintain and promote community character and appearance; and 
Ensure new development provides height and design transitions to R- and RM-zoned areas. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.94), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-05, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-465. Uses.
(a)	Principal uses. Principal uses are allowed in PR districts in accordance with article VII, division 2 of this chapter. 
(b)	Accessory uses. Accessory uses are allowed in PR districts in accordance with article VII, division 2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.95), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-466. Allowed building types.
PR district regulations differ by building type. Only the building types identified in table 6-2 and the uses identified in table 7-1 are allowed in PR districts. The final column of table 6-2 indicates the location of regulations that apply to specific building types. 


;sz=9q;Table 6-2 Notes  [1] Permitted only on lots that abut R- or RM-zoned lots.  [2] Not permitted on lots with frontage on Dresden Drive. Requires SLUP approval if located within 150 feet of Peachtree Road right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.96), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-467. Detached house regulations.
Detached houses are subject to the regulations of table 6-3 (see also figure 6-1 and the Peachtree Road Overlay [/PRO] regulations of article V). 




(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.97), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-468. Attached house regulations.
Attached houses are subject to the regulations of table 6-4 (see also figure 6-2 and the Peachtree Road Overlay [/PRO] regulations of article V). 


Table 6-4 Notes  [1] End units subject to minimum 15-foot interior side setback. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.98), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-469. Walk-up building regulations.
Walk-up buildings are subject to the regulations of table 6-5 (see also figure 6-3 and the Peachtree Road Overlay [/PRO] regulations of article V). 




(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.99), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-470. Commercial house regulations.
Commercial houses are subject to the regulations of table 6-6 (see also figure 6-4 and the Peachtree Road Overlay [/PRO] regulations of article V). 




(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.100), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-471. Shopfront building regulations.
Shopfront buildings are subject to the regulations of table 6-7 (see also figure 6-5 and the Peachtree Road Overlay [/PRO] regulations of article V). 


Table 6-7 Notes  [1] On lots with frontage on Apple Valley Road, all portions of buildings above 80 feet in height shall be set back at least 20 feet from the front facade of the building story immediately below.  [2] All portions of buildings above 60 feet in height shall be set back at least 20 feet from the front facade of the building story immediately below.  [3] Buildings may not exceed 4 stories in height east of Apple Valley Road. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.101), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-472. General building regulations.
General buildings are subject to the regulations of table 6-8. (See also figure 6-6 and the Peachtree Road Overlay [/PRO] regulations of article V). 


Table 6-8 Notes  [1] No less than 25% of ground story floor area shall be occupied by those active ground-story uses identified in Sec. 27-474; however, where a general building is part of a multi-building development and not located along a public right-of-way, active ground-story uses shall not be required and any use allowed by Table 7-1 shall be permitted.  [2] On lots with frontage on Apple Valley Road, all portions of buildings above 80 feet in height shall be set back at least 20 feet from the front facade of the building story immediately below.  [3] All portions of buildings above 60 feet in height shall be set back at least 20 feet from the front facade of the building story immediately below.  [4] Buildings may not exceed 4 stories in height east of Apple Valley Road. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.102), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2020-09-11, § I(Attch.), 9-22-2020)
Sec. 27-473. Front setbacks.
Minimum and maximum front setbacks within the PR districts are measured from the inner edge of the pedestrian zone established by the Peachtree Road Overlay district (/PRO) regulations of article V, division 3. The maximum front setback regulations are not intended to prohibit placement of open space between buildings and streets. When open space is located between a building and the street, the open space shall comply with the applicable regulations of section 27-482 and any maximum setback is measured from the perimeter of the open space area. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.103), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-474. Public benefit height bonuses.
Bonus building height is allowed for sites or buildings that provide public benefits in the form of additional open space, workforce housing units or active ground-story uses. Such bonuses are allowed only as expressly identified in section 27-468, section 27-469, section 27-471 and section 27-472, and this section. 
(1)	Open space. 
a.	Building height bonuses for the provision of additional open space (above minimum required levels) are allowed only on sites with an area of one acre or more. 
b.	One story of bonus height is allowed for projects that set-aside at least 20 percent of the site as publicly accessible open space meeting all applicable regulations of section 27-482. 
(2)	Workforce housing. 
a.	Building height bonuses for the provision of workforce housing are allowed for attached houses, walk-up buildings, shopfront buildings and general buildings. 
b.	One story of bonus height is allowed for restricting at least 20 percent of housing units on the development site as workforce housing units. 
c.	Workforce housing units provided to obtain building height bonuses shall be restricted for occupancy as workforce housing units for at least 20 years. 
d.	Deed restrictions or other binding agreements governing the design, location and restricted occupancy of workforce housing units shall be provided in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(3)	Active ground-story uses. 
a.	Building height bonuses for the provision of active uses on the ground-story of shopfront buildings are allowed only on lots with frontage on Peachtree Road or Apple Valley Road. 
b.	One story of bonus height is available for restricting at least 75 percent of the ground story floor area in such buildings to occupancy by one or more of the following uses: 
1.	Art gallery; 
2.	Commercial service, such as dry cleaning pick-up station, copy shop, electronics/jewelry repair, and shoe repair; 
3.	Personal improvement service, such as barbershop, beauty shop, nail salon, day spa, yoga/fitness studio, and dance studio; 
4.	Restaurant (except drive-through); or 
5.	Retail sales. 
c.	In order to count towards meeting the 75 percent minimum, the ground-story floor space shall have a minimum depth of at least 30 feet. 
d.	Deed restrictions or other binding agreements governing the design, location and occupancy of ground-story floor space shall be provided and approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.104), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-475. TOD height bonus.
(a)	Special building height bonuses are available within the TOD (transit-oriented development) height bonus area and only as expressly identified in section 27-471 and section 27-472. 
(b)	The area eligible for TOD height bonuses is bounded by the centerline of the following streets, provided that TOD height bonuses are prohibited for buildings located within 150 feet of the centerline of Apple Valley Road: 
(1)	North Druid Hills Road on the south; 
(2)	Peachtree Road on west; 
(3)	Dresden Drive on the north; and 
(4)	Apple Valley Road on the east. 
(c)	TOD building height bonuses require review and approval in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article 10, division 3 of this chapter. 
(d)	All properties for which TOD height bonuses are requested shall comply with the following supplemental regulations: 
(1)	At least 25 percent of the subject site shall be publicly accessible open space that complies with section 27-482. Open space provided to meet TOD bonus eligibility requirements may be located outside of the TOD bonus area described in paragraph (b) of this section (section 27-475), provided that they are located west of Apple Valley Road and located on the same site as the building receiving the bonus sites with frontage on Peachtree Road shall include at least one open space that is at least 10,000 square feet in area. Sites with frontage on Apple Valley Road shall include at least one contiguous open space area that is suitable for public gatherings and is at least 40,000 square feet in area. Sites with frontage on both Peachtree Road and Apple Valley Road shall provide both required forms of open space. 
(2)	In addition to meeting the open space requirements of paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the proposed development shall also provide at least two of the following features: 
a.	Workforce housing units equal to at least 20 percent of the overall number of dwelling units in the project, subject to section 27-474. 
b.	At least 40,000 square feet of active ground story uses, subject to section 27-474. 
c.	A community meeting facility with a gross floor area of at least 8,000 square feet, which can be in the form of a community center, public meeting room, or public library meeting room that is available for community meetings, easily accessible to the public and with access to public restrooms and a service kitchen to support catered events and convenience food service. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.105), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-476. Transparency.
Transparency regulations govern the minimum percentage of a street-facing building façade that shall be covered by windows or glazed, transparent elements. In determining compliance with transparency requirements on a building facade, the transparency of each building story shall be calculated separately. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.106), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-477. Lot edges.
(a)	Description. The term "lot edge" refers to the area of a lot located immediately beyond the back of the required sidewalk between: 
(1)	The back of the sidewalk and a principal building; 
(2)	The back of the sidewalk and an allowed unenclosed parking lot or parking deck; and 
(3)	The back of the sidewalk and an allowed open space area. 
(b)	Purpose. The design of lot edges helps define the transition between public and private property and contributes to the overall character of an area, particularly for pedestrians. 
(c)	Edge type regulations. 
(1)	General. Different lot edge types and elements are required in accordance with the regulations that apply to the different building types allowed in PR districts (see section 27-467, section 27-468, section 27-469, section 27-470, section 27-471 and section 27-472). The following general regulations apply to all lot edge types: 
a.	Mechanical equipment and other building service may not be located in the lot edge along the front of the lot. 
b.	Lot edges may not be used for vehicles, except for driveway or alley crossing, incidental service, maintenance or emergency actions. 
c.	Lot edges may not be counted towards meeting minimum open space requirements except when an open space edge is incorporated into a conforming open space. 
(2)	Landscape edge. Landscape edges are subject to the following additional regulations: 
a.	Landscaping, such as trees, shrubs, groundcover plants, sod, or annual or perennial vegetation, shall be provided in at least 50 percent of the lot edge area. The area of any stoops or porches is not counted in determining the total lot edge area. 
b.	The area of water features, such as pools and fountains, may not be counted towards satisfying minimum landscape area requirements. 
c.	The landscape edge may not be used for vehicles, except for incidental service, maintenance or emergency actions. 
d.	The landscape edge may not be covered, except by incidental architectural projections such as balconies, awnings, cornices, and similar architectural elements. 
e.	Landscape edges greater than five feet in depth shall be planted with at least one tree per 50 linear feet. 
(3)	Hardscape edge. Hardscape edges are subject to the following additional regulations: 
a.	Hardscape areas improved for pedestrian amenity or aesthetic appeal shall be provided in at least 50 percent of the lot edge area. The area of any stoops or porches is not counted in determining the total lot edge area. 
b.	The area of water features, such as pools and fountains, may be counted towards satisfying minimum hardscape area requirements. 
c.	Hardscape edges greater than ten feet in depth shall be planted with at least one shade tree per 50 linear feet. Required trees shall comply with the size requirements of section 27-483. 
d.	Hardscape edges shall provide at least one bench or similar seating area per 50 linear feet. 
e.	Hardscape edges may not be covered, except by incidental architectural projections such as balconies, awnings, cornices, and similar architectural elements or by outdoor dining areas. 
(4)	Parking edge. Lot edges that are immediately adjacent to an allowed parking lot are subject to following regulations: 
a.	A landscape strip shall be provided in accordance with section 27-483. 
b.	At least one point of pedestrian access in the form of paths, walkways, ramps, or stairs shall be provided to connect the public sidewalk to the parking lot. 
(5)	Open space edge. Lot edges that are immediately adjacent to an allowed open space are subject to following regulations: 
a.	Pedestrian access in the form of paths, walkways, ramps, or stairs shall be provided to connect the adjacent public sidewalk to the open space. 
b.	At least one pedestrian access point shall be provided per 100 linear feet. 
(d)	Edge elements. Edge elements in the form of porches and stoops are required for detached house, attached house, walk-up and commercial house building types (see section 27-406, section 27-468, section 27-469, and section 27-470). When required, such elements are subject to compliance with the regulations of this subsection. 
(1)	Porches. Required porches shall be located along the front facade and comply with the following: 
a.	A porch shall be at least six feet in depth, not including steps leading to the porch. 
b.	A porch shall have a width of at least 33 percent of the building facade from which it projects. 
c.	A porch shall have a roof, but it may not be enclosed other than by screens. 
d.	Porches required under these PR district provisions may extend into a required front setback if such extension is at least two feet from all lot lines. 
e.	A porch may not encroach into a required sidewalk. 
(2)	Stoops. Required stoops shall be located along the front facade and comply with the following: 
a.	A stoop may not exceed six feet in depth, not including any steps leading to the stoop. 
b.	A stoop may have a cover but may not be enclosed. 
c.	Stoops required under these PR district provisions may extend into a required front setback if such extension is at least two feet from all lot lines. 
d.	A stoop may not encroach into a required sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.107), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-478. Neighborhood transitions.
(a)	Neighborhood transition buffers. 
(1)	Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section (section 27-478), when a PR-zoned lot abuts any R- or RM-zoned lot, a neighborhood transition buffer shall be maintained on the PR-zoned lot to help ensure effective buffering and visual screening between the districts. The required buffer shall have a width of at least 30 feet or a width equal to 15 percent of the depth of the subject lot, whichever is greater. 
a.	The required neighborhood transition buffer shall be left undisturbed, and may not be paved or otherwise covered with impervious surfaces. 
b.	Neighborhood transition buffers may not be used for parking, loading, storage or any other use, except that the community development director is authorized to permit the placement of utilities within neighborhood transition buffer areas when the applicant shows that it is impractical to place such utilities outside required buffers. 
c.	Trees may not be removed from required neighborhood transition buffer areas unless such trees are dead or diseased, as determined by the city arborist. The community development director is authorized to require the installation of new trees, and landscape screening material, including plants and fences, when determined to be necessary to provide an effective visual screen. 
(2)	When a lot occupied solely by detached houses or attached houses is allowed in lieu of a neighborhood transition buffer, it is exempt from the neighborhood transition buffer requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this section (section 27-478). 
(b)	Neighborhood transition height plane. 
(1)	All PR-zoned lots that abut R- or RM-zoned lots or that are separated from R- or RM-zoned lots solely by street or railroad right-of-way are subject to the neighborhood transition height plane requirements of this subsection (section 27-478(b)). 
(2)	The neighborhood transition height plane begins 45 feet above ground level at the common lot line between the PR- and R- or RM-zoned lot and extends inward (towards the PR-zoned lot) for a horizontal distance of 75 feet and then angles upward at a 45 degree angle. When a street or railroad right-of-way separates the PR- and R- or RM-zoned lots, the neighborhood transition height plane measurement begins 45 feet above ground level at the lot line of the R- or RM-zoned lots (on the opposite side of the right-of-way from the PR-zoned lot). 
(3)	No building or portion of building may protrude above the neighborhood transition height plane established in this subsection (section 27-478(b)). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.108), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-479. Building design and plan review.
(a)	Applicability. The building design regulations of this section apply to all allowed building types except detached houses, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(b)	Purposes. The building design regulations of this section are intended to improve the physical and aesthetic quality of buildings, activate the pedestrian environment and maintain and protect the character of PR districts. 
(c)	Exterior wall finish materials.
(2)	The following exterior wall finish materials shall be used on at least 80 percent of the first four stories of any building facade visible from a public street, not including building foundations, non-glass window components, and doors: 
a.	Brick, including full-depth and half-depth masonry brick, but not simulated brick veneers; or 
b.	Stone, including unpainted natural stone, unpainted cast stone having the appearance of natural stone, and unpainted terracotta. 
(2)	The following exterior wall finish materials shall be used on at least 80 percent of the first four stories of any building facade that is not visible from a public street, not including building foundations, non-glass window components, and doors: 
a.	Building materials allowed on facades visible from public streets; 
b.	Wood, including natural wood or cement-based artificial wood siding; or 
c.	Shingles, including wood or cement-based shakes and shingles. 
(3)	The exterior wall finish material regulations of paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section (section 27-479) also apply to buildings more than four stories in height, except that glass and metal curtain wall systems are allowed to be used on all building stories above the fourth story. 
(4)	Building materials other than those expressly identified in paragraphs (c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section (section 27-479) may be used on up to 20 percent of any exterior building facade, calculated on the basis of each individual building facade. 
(d)	Vertical delineation of building stories. The first one or two stories of every shopfront and general building shall be delineated from the stories above through the use of cornice lines, horizontal shadow lines, fenestration and other forms of architectural detailing. 
(e)	Building articulation and massing. 
(1)	In order to avoid large expanses of flat (one-dimensional) exterior walls along sidewalks, building facades over 50 feet in length along a street, including abutting attached house dwelling units, shall incorporate wall projections or recesses a minimum of 12 inches in depth. The combined length of such recesses and projections shall constitute at least 20 percent of the total façade length along the public street. 
(2)	Building roof lines along street-facing facades shall change at least once every 200 feet of facade length. This change shall occur for a minimum length of 20 feet and be accomplished through at least one of the following: 
a.	A change of roof parapet wall height and material; 
b.	A change in roof cornice design; 
c.	A change in the number of stories; 
d.	A change in roof shape. 
(3)	Street-facing building facades may not exceed 300 feet in length along any single street. 
(f)	Plan review. 
(1)	The community development director is expressly authorized to delegate plan and design reviews for any project within a PR district to design professionals retained by the city to provide design review assistance. 
(2)	The costs of any third-party plan reviews shall be borne by the applicant. 
(3)	If the project requires review or approval by the board of appeals, planning commission or city council (e.g., as part of a rezoning, SLUP, variance, etc.,), the findings and recommendations from the plan review shall be forwarded to the applicable review and decision making body for consideration before the time of their recommendation or decision. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.109), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-480. Pedestrian access.
(a)	Buildings abutting lot edges. All buildings that abut a lot edge (see section 27-477) are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	All building types and individual ground-story commercial establishments shall provide a pedestrian entrance along the lot edge that provides both ingress and egress, operable to residents or customers. This requirement expressly applies to individual dwelling units with an attached house building. 
(2)	Additional entrances off another street, an open space, or internal parking area are also permitted. 
(3)	If a building abuts a lot edge along more than one public street, the required pedestrian entrance shall face the street with the highest classification, as follows (from highest to lowest): 
a.	Primary streets: Peachtree Road and Apple Valley Road; 
b.	Secondary streets: Dresden Drive, North Druid Hills Road, Hermance Drive, Ashford-Dunwoody Road, Lanier Drive, Osborne Drive, Brookhaven Place; and 
c.	Tertiary streets: new and existing streets not classified as primary or secondary. 
(4)	All required entrances shall provide safe and convenient pedestrian pathways from the adjacent public sidewalk. Pathways that exclusively serve individual residential units shall have a minimum width of three feet. All other pathways shall have a minimum width of five feet. 
(b)	Buildings not abutting lot edges. All buildings that do not abut a lot edge are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Buildings and individual ground-story commercial establishments shall provide safe and convenient pedestrian pathway from their required pedestrian entrance to a public sidewalk. This requirement expressly applies to individual dwelling units with an attached house building. 
(2)	Pathways that exclusively serve individual residential units shall have a minimum width of three feet. All other pathways shall have a minimum width of five feet. 
(3)	The total combined length of the pedestrian pathway from the entrance to the sidewalk may not exceed 150 percent of the straight line distance from the entrance to the closest public sidewalk, except where an intervening rail line, stream or similar physical barrier exists. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.110), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-481. Parking.
(a)	General. The parking and access regulations of article VIII apply in PR districts unless otherwise expressly stated in this division (article VI, division 2). 
(b)	Parking location. 
(1)	Access to off-street parking spaces serving attached houses shall come from alleys or shared driveways located in street side or rear yard. Access to off-street parking spaces serving all other building types shall come from alleys or driveways. 
(2)	Off-street parking may not be located between a public street and a principal building's front facade. On lots with more than one street frontage, the front of the lot is deemed to be the side of the lot with frontage on the street with the highest classification, as follows (from highest to lowest): 
a.	Primary streets: Peachtree Road and Apple Valley Road; 
b.	Secondary streets: Dresden Drive, North Druid Hills Road, Hermance Drive, Ashford-Dunwoody Road, Lanier Drive, Osborne Drive, Brookhaven Place; and 
c.	Tertiary streets: New streets and existing streets not classified as primary or secondary. 
(3)	Off-street parking spaces located within the ground-story of any building, including a parking deck, may not be located within 20 feet of any street-facing building facade that abuts a lot edge. This provision does not apply to the street-side facade of detached houses or attached houses. 
(4)	Wheel stops shall be provided in parking spaces located adjacent to pedestrian zones. 
(c)	Design. 
(1)	Parking decks. All upper stories of a parking deck visible from a public street are subject to the building design regulations of section 27-479. 
(2)	Parking deck lighting. Light fixtures that are directly visible from the exterior of a parking deck shall either be directed upward or shielded so that the light source is not visible from outside the parking deck. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.111), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-482. Open space.
(a)	Applicability. On-site open space shall be provided for development sites except those developed exclusively with single-family detached dwellings. 
(b)	Minimum open space ratio. The minimum amount of on-site open space required is based on the size of the lot on which the use is located, as follows: 
(1)	On development sites with an area of less than one acre, at least percent of the development site shall be open space; and 
(2)	On development sites with an area of one acre or more, at least 15 percent of the development site shall be open space. 
(c)	General regulations. The general regulations of this subsection apply to open space provided to meet minimum open space ratios and to open space provided to obtain a public benefit or TOD height bonus. 
(1)	Areas counted to meet the open space regulations of this section (section 27-482) and to qualify for public benefit height bonuses (see section 27-474) shall be provided in the form of amenity spaces, plazas, pocket parks or parks that comply with the applicable regulations of this section. Street rights-of-way, parking lots, outdoor dining areas, neighborhood transition buffers, landscape strips and other areas that do not comply with applicable open space regulations may not be counted toward satisfying minimum or bonus open space ratios. 
(2)	No buildings may be located in open spaces unless expressly stated in this section. 
(3)	Unless otherwise expressly stated in this section, open spaces shall be open to general public access during daylight hours and shall be directly accessible from a public sidewalk. 
(4)	Open spaces shall be at-grade, unless otherwise expressly stated in this section. 
(5)	No individual open space may traverse a street or rail right-of-way unless located on a bridge over such right-of-way that conforms to the minimum dimensional requirements of the subject open space type. 
(6)	When a building or individual ground-story commercial establishment adjoins an open space, pedestrian access (both ingress and egress), operable to residents or customers, shall be provided. 
(7)	Stormwater management practices, such as normally dry storage and retention facilities or ponds that retain water, may be integrated into open spaces, subject to the following: 
a.	Stormwater features in open space shall be designed by a qualified professional as formal or natural amenities with additional uses other than stormwater management, such as an amphitheater, sports field, or a pond or pool as part of the landscape design. It is strongly encouraged to consider eco-art landscape design principles for the design of these features. 
b.	Stormwater features may not be fenced or enclosed by retaining walls over 30 inches in height. 
(8)	Trees used to satisfy minimum open space requirements shall: 
a.	Be at least three and one-half inches in caliper size (measured 12 inches above the ground); 
b.	Be at least 16 feet in height at time of planting, with a minimum mature height of 30 feet; 
c.	Be spaced at least 25 feet on-center; and 
d.	Limbed up to a height of at least eight feet. 
(9)	All open space requirements shall be fully met before issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development. 
(10)	Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership of all open spaces, the method of and responsibility for maintenance, taxes and insurance, compulsory membership and assessment provisions, and shall be incorporated into legal instruments sufficient to ensure that the open space requirements of this section are maintained. Such arrangements shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(d)	Open space types. 
(1)	Amenity space. The amenity space open space type is intended to provide small covered or uncovered, unenclosed, outdoor areas on development sites of less than one acre. Amenity spaces are limited to at-grade hardscape or landscape areas improved for pedestrian enjoyment; rooftop decks; patios and porches; balconies; or yards, lawns, and gardens. Interior or exterior stairs or elevators may provide access to rooftop decks, patios, porches, and balconies. They are further subject to compliance with the criteria of table 6-9. 


(2)	Plaza. The plaza open space type is intended to provide an open space, available for civic purposes and commercial activities. A plaza shall be spatially defined by buildings or streets at its edges. Plazas are subject to the regulations of table 6-10. 


(3)	Pocket park. The pocket park open space type is intended to provide an open space for unstructured recreation. A pocket park may be spatially defined by buildings or streets at its edges. Pocket parks are subject to the regulations of table 6-11. 


(4)	Park. The park open space type is intended to provide an open space available for structured or unstructured recreation. A park may be independent of surrounding buildings at its edges. Parks are subject to the regulations of table 6-12. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.112), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2022-05-03, § I, 5-24-2022)
Sec. 27-483. Landscaping and screening.
See article IX, division 1. 
Sec. 27-484. Signs.
(a)	Signs are allowed in PR districts in accordance with the regulations of chapter 21 except as modified by the sign regulations of this section. 
(b)	Sidewalk signs are permitted within PR districts. For the purpose of administering the provisions of this section, a "sidewalk sign" is defined as A-frame or easel-style sign placed on the sidewalk near the entrance to a business establishment. Sidewalk signs are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	A maximum of one sidewalk sign is allowed per use. 
(2)	Sidewalk signs may not exceed three feet in height. 
(3)	Sidewalk signs may not exceed six square feet in area per sign face. 
(4)	Sidewalk signs shall be constructed or fabricated of wood or metal. 
(5)	Sidewalk signs shall be located within 15 feet of a main building entrance in a manner that allows a clear, unobstructed sidewalk width of 36 inches or a distance that complies with ADA requirements, whichever is greater. 
(6)	All sidewalk signs shall be removed from the sidewalk upon cessation of business hours each day and stored indoors. 
(7)	Sidewalk signs may not be illuminated or contain neon. 
(8)	Evidence of neglect or dilapidation of any sidewalk sign constitutes cause for immediate removal. 
(9)	Sidewalk signs do not require a sign permit or authorization sticker. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.114), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-485—27-494. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. MPD, MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
Sec. 27-495. Purpose.
(a)	General. The MPD, Master Planned Development district is intended to accommodate development that may be difficult if not impossible to carry out under otherwise applicable zoning district regulations. Examples of the types of development that may benefit from the MPD zoning tool include the following: 
(1)	Enhanced protection of natural resources. Developments that offer enhanced protection of natural resources and sensitive environmental features, including streams, water bodies, floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes, woodlands and native plant communities. 
(2)	Traditional urban development. Developments characterized by lot configurations, street patterns, streetscapes, and neighborhood amenities commonly found in urban neighborhoods created before the 1950s. 
(3)	Mixed-use development. Developments that contain a complementary mix of residential and nonresidential uses. 
(4)	Mixed housing development. Residential developments containing a mix of housing types geared toward different age groups, income levels and lifestyle preferences. 
(b)	Specific objectives. Different types of MPDs will promote different planning goals. In general, however, MPDs are intended to promote the following objectives: 
(1)	Flexibility and creativity in responding to changing social, economic, and market conditions and that results in greater public benefits than could be achieved using conventional zoning and development regulations; 
(2)	Implementation and consistency with the city's adopted plans and policies; 
(3)	Efficient and economical provision of public facilities and services; 
(4)	Sustainable, long-term communities that provide economic opportunity and environmental and social equity for residents; 
(5)	Variety in housing types and sizes to accommodate households of all ages, sizes, incomes, and lifestyle choices; 
(6)	Compact, mixed-use development patterns where residential, commercial, civic, and open spaces are located in close proximity to one another; 
(7)	A coordinated transportation system that includes an inter-connected hierarchy of appropriately designed improvements for motorized and nonmotorized transportation; 
(8)	Compatibility of buildings and other improvements as determined by their arrangement, massing, form, character, and landscaping to establish a high-quality livable environment; 
(9)	The incorporation of open space amenities and natural resource features into the development design; 
(10)	Low-impact development (LID) practices; and 
(11)	Attractive, high-quality landscaping, lighting, architecture, and signage that reflects the unique character of the development. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.115), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-496. Review and approval procedure.
MPDs shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures of article X, division 4. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.116), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-497. Application thresholds.
(a)	No MPD rezoning application or development plan application may be accepted or any site that includes less than two continuous acres of land area. 
(b)	Each MPD application shall include a written explanation from the applicant describing the community benefits of the proposed development and how the proposed development provides greater benefits to the city than would a development carried out in accordance with otherwise applicable zoning ordinance regulations. 
(c)	No MPD rezoning application or development plan application may be accepted unless the applicant agrees in writing to achieve one or more of the following minimum public benefit thresholds: 
(1)	Restricting at least 20 percent of housing units on the development site as workforce housing units for a period of at least 20 years; 
(2)	Setting aside publicly accessible open space that complies with the open space regulations of section 27-482. 
(3)	Setting aside at least 15 percent of the development site to protect sensitive natural resources, not counting areas otherwise required to be preserved by other applicable regulations. 
(4)	Achieving LEED for Neighborhood Development (LEED ND)) certification or a city-approved equivalent certification for communities or neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.117), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-498. Use regulations and lot and building regulations.
The use regulations and lot and building regulations that apply within an MPD zoning district shall be established at the time of preliminary development plan approval by the city council. All such regulations, including residential densities and nonresidential intensities, shall be consistent with any approved plans for the area. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.118), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-499. Other development regulations.
(a)	Unless otherwise expressly approved by the city council at the time of preliminary development plan approval, properties within the MPD district are subject to all other applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance and the city code. The city council is authorized to approve MPDs that deviate from strict compliance with otherwise applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance if they determine that the resulting development provides a greater level of public benefit than would normally be expected for projects developed in strict compliance with this zoning ordinance. 
(b)	The MPD district is expressly intended to accommodate the use of alternative standards for public improvements based on the approved development plans. The preliminary development plan shall specify the deviations from the city's infrastructure and development standards for streets, sidewalks, stormwater management, and any other public improvement if deviations from otherwise applicable standards are proposed. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.119), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-500. Approval criteria.
MPD zoning may be approved only when the city council, after receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, determines that: 
(1)	The proposed development cannot be reasonably accommodated by other available regulations of this zoning ordinance; 
(2)	The proposed development meets the application thresholds specified in section 27-497; and 
(3)	The proposed development MPD would result in a greater benefit to the city as a whole than would development under conventional zoning district regulations. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.120), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-501—27-510. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. TND (LEGACY) DISTRICT
Sec. 27-511. Legacy district status.
(a)	Lands classified in a TND zoning district on the effective date specified in section 27-4 will continue to be classified in the TND district and be subject to all applicable conditions of approval until such lands are rezoned in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of article X, division 2 of this chapter. 
(b)	No applications to establish new TND zoning districts or to expand the boundaries of existing TND zoning districts may be accepted for processing after the effective date specified in section 27-4. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.121), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-512. Regulations.
TND-zoned lands are governed by applicable regulations contained in the zoning ordinance in effect immediately before the effective date specified in section 27-4. A copy of these regulations shall be maintained in the office of the community development director and be available for public inspection during regular office hours. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.122), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-513—27-522. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. R-CH (LEGACY) DISTRICT
Sec. 27-523. Legacy district status.
(a)	Lands classified in an R-CH zoning district on the effective date specified in section 27-4 will continue to be classified in the R-CH district and be subject to all applicable conditions of approval until such lands are rezoned in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of article X, division 2 of this chapter. 
(b)	No applications to establish new R-CH zoning districts or to expand the boundaries of existing R-CH zoning districts may be accepted for processing after the effective date specified in section 27-4. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.123), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-524. Regulations.
R-CH-zoned lands are governed by applicable regulations contained in the zoning ordinance in effect immediately before the effective date specified in section 27-4. A copy of these regulations are maintained in the office of the community development director and are available for public inspection during regular office hours. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.123), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-525—27-534. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. PC-2 (LEGACY) DISTRICT
Sec. 27-535. Legacy district status.
(a)	Lands classified in a PC-2 zoning district on the effective date specified in section 27-4 will continue to be classified in the PC-2 district and be subject to all applicable conditions of approval until such lands are rezoned in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of article X, division 2 of this chapter. 
(b)	No applications to establish new PC-2 zoning districts or to expand the boundaries of existing PC-2 zoning districts may be accepted for processing after the effective date specified in section 27-4. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.125), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-536. Regulations.
PC-2-zoned lands are governed by applicable regulations contained in the zoning ordinance in effect immediately before the effective date specified in section 27-4. A copy of these regulations are maintained in the office of the community development director and are available for public inspection during regular office hours. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.126), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-537—27-539. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. ANX, ANNEXATION DISTRICTS
Sec. 27-540. Purpose.
(a)	The ANX, Annexation district is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
(1)	Accommodate the annexation of properties from DeKalb County into the City of Brookhaven; 
(2)	Promote consistency between the existing zoning classification and land use of properties to be annexed and the City of Brookhaven's zoning ordinance; 
(3)	Ensure that the annexation and subsequent rezoning places no additional burden on DeKalb County infrastructure and provided services from the annexation of property into the City of Brookhaven; 
(4)	Provide that owners of annexed property have the opportunity to become acquainted with zoning ordinances of the City of Brookhaven; and 
(5)	Provide that the City of Brookhaven has ample opportunity to add annexed property to the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)	The districts. Upon Annexation of new properties into the City of Brookhaven, all properties will be rezoned to the ANX district. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-08, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-541. Uses.
(a)	Principal uses. Allowed principal uses are allowed in ANX districts in accordance with uses for which that property was zoned in the previous jurisdiction immediately prior to such annexation. 
(b)	Accessory uses. Allowed accessory uses are allowed in ANX districts in accordance with uses for which that property was zoned in the previous jurisdiction immediately prior to such annexation. 
(c)	Special administrative permits. Uses allowed by the previous jurisdiction with a special administrative permit from the director of planning are subject to approval through the Special Land Use Permit (SLUP) procedures of article 10, division 3 of this chapter. 
(d)	Special land use permits. Uses previously allowed by the previous jurisdiction with a special land use permit from the board of commissioners are subject to approval through the special land use permit (SLUP) procedures of article 10, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-08, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-542. Lot and building regulations.
(a)	Lot and building regulations for all newly annexed properties shall be in accordance with the dimensional requirements as outlined in the zoning ordinance of the previous jurisdiction. 
(b)	Zoning ordinance at the time of annexation will be adopted with the annexation ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-08, § I, 6-28-2023)
Secs. 27-543—27-546. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. USES
DIVISION 1. RESERVED
Secs. 27-547—27-560. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PRINCIPAL USES ALLOWED
Sec. 27-561. Use table.
Principal uses are allowed in accordance with table 7-1. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.141), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-562. Interpreting the use table.
(a)	Use classification system. Uses are listed in the first column of table 7-1. This zoning ordinance classifies uses into categories and subcategories, as explained in article VII, division 3. In some cases, specific use types are listed in addition to the use categories and subcategories. 
(b)	Permitted uses.
(1)	Uses identified with a "●" are permitted as-of-right in the subject zoning district, subject to compliance with any supplemental regulations identified in the final column of table 7-1 and with all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
(2)	Uses identified with a "◓" are permitted as-of-right in the subject zoning district but only when located above the ground-floor. Such uses are prohibited on the ground-floor. 
(c)	Special land use permit approval. Uses identified with "ⓢ" are allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article 10, division 3 of this chapter. 
(d)	Prohibited uses. Uses identified with an "-" are expressly prohibited. Uses that are not listed in the table and that cannot be reasonably interpreted (as stated in section 27-577) to fall within any defined use category or subcategory are also prohibited. 
(e)	Reference. The final ("Reference") column of table 7-1 includes a cross-reference to the use definition and any applicable supplemental use regulations that apply to the use. Unless otherwise expressly stated, compliance with supplemental use regulations is required regardless of whether the use is permitted as-of-right or requires approval of a special land use permit. Bracketed numbers also refer to use-specific conditions, which are included as footnotes immediately following the use table. 
(f)	Accessory use. Accessory uses are generally not identified by table 7-1. Customary accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with principal uses permitted by right or by special land use permit approval, subject to compliance with all applicable accessory use regulations of article VII, division 11. 




;sz=9q;Table 7-1 Notes  [1] Permitted only on lots immediately abutting or directly across the street from R-zoned lots.  [2] Allowed as of right except as follows:    a. Density of 30.01 to 120 units per acre requires special land use approval in PR-2 and PR-3;    b. Density of more than 120 units per acre requires special land use approval in PR-1 and is prohibited in PR-2 and PR-3;    c. No more than 60% of dwelling units in any project may have a floor area of less than 800 square feet.  [3] Live-work units shall have a gross floor area of at least 1,200 square feet, with at least 33% of the overall floor area devoted to the residential dwelling unit. No more than 5 nonresident employees or 5 customers or clients may be on-site at any one time.  [4] Gross floor area may not exceed 5,000 square feet.  [5] Gross floor area may not exceed 50,000 square feet.  [6] Drive-through windows and drive-in service areas associated with restaurant uses are expressly prohibited in PR districts. Accessory drive-through or drive-in service associated with other uses are limited to a maximum of one drive-through order area, one drive-through lane and one drive-through service window.  [7] Multi-unit buildings are allowed in the C-1 district on properties located south of I-85.  [8] Use requires approval through Special Land Use Permit for properties located in the Buford Highway Overlay.  [9] Four+-Household uses shall be secondary and subordinate to other uses allowed within the M (Industrial) district and shall not be located on the ground floor.  
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.142), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-12-01, § I(Attch.), 12-10-2019; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-04, § I, 6-28-2023; Ord. No. 2024-02-01, § I, 2-27-2024)
Secs. 27-563—27-572. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. USE CLASSIFICATIONS
Sec. 27-573. General.
This division describes the system used to classify principal uses in this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.143), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-574. Use categories.
This zoning ordinance classifies principal land uses into five major groupings). These major groupings are referred to as "use categories." The use categories are as follows: 
(1)	Residential (see article VII, division 4). 
(2)	Public and civic (see article VII, division 5). 
(3)	Commercial (see article VII, division 6). 
(4)	Industrial (see article VII, division 7). 
(5)	Agricultural (see article VII, division 8). 
(6)	Wireless communication (see article VII, division 9) 
(7)	Other (see article VII, division 10). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.144), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-575. Use subcategories.
Each use category is further divided into more specific "subcategories." Use subcategories classify principal land uses and activities based on common functional, product or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, and how goods or services are sold or delivered and site conditions. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.145), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-576. Specific use types.
Some use subcategories are further broken down to identify specific types of uses that are regulated differently than the subcategory as a whole. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.146), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-04-02, § II, 4-23-2019; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-577. Determination of use categories and subcategories.
(a)	The community development director is authorized to classify uses on the basis of the use category, subcategory and specific use type descriptions of this article. 
(b)	When a use cannot be reasonably classified into a use category, subcategory or specific use type, or appears to fit into multiple categories, subcategories or specific use types, the community development director is authorized to determine the most similar and thus most appropriate use category, subcategory or specific use type based on the actual or projected characteristics of the principal use or activity in relationship to the use category, subcategory and specific use type descriptions provided in this article. In making such determinations, the community development director shall consider: 
(1)	The types of activities that typically occur in conjunction with the use; 
(2)	The types of equipment and processes to be used; 
(3)	The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers or employees; 
(4)	Parking demands or the use; and 
(5)	Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination. 
(c)	If a use can reasonably be classified in multiple categories, subcategories or specific use types, the community development director is authorized to categorize each use in the category, subcategory or specific use type that provides the most exact, narrowest and appropriate "fit." 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.147), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-578—27-587. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. RESIDENTIAL USES
Sec. 27-588. Household living.
Household living is residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a single household, including, single household, two-household, three-household, four+-household and live-work uses. 
(1)	Single-household. One principal dwelling unit on a single lot, which may also include an accessory dwelling unit, if allowed by the subject zoning district. 
(2)	Two-household. Two principal dwelling units on a single lot. 
(3)	Three-household. Three principal dwelling units on a single lot. 
(4)	Four+-household. Four or more principal dwelling units on a single lot. Four+-household uses may be subject to the supplemental workforce housing regulations of section 27-588(6). 
(5)	Live-work. A building or space within a building used jointly for residential and nonresidential uses allowed within the subject zoning district. 
(6)	Workforce housing.
 a.	Mandatory minimum. Whenever the city approves a special land use permit for or the rezoning of property, and such property is subsequently developed with a residential housing project, the developer shall be required to restrict at least ten percent of the dwelling units in the residential housing project as workforce housing. 
b.	Density. Workforce housing units provided to meet mandatory requirements or incentive-based workforce housing provisions shall not be counted as dwelling units for purpose of calculating the maximum allowable density allowed on the subject property, 
c.	Required agreements. Workforce housing units provided to meet mandatory minimum requirements or qualify for workforce housing incentives shall be restricted for occupancy as workforce housing units for at least 20 years. Deed restrictions or other binding agreements governing the design, location and restricted occupancy of workforce housing units shall be provided in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(7)	Varying unit sizes.
 a.	Purpose. The standards of this section are intended to: 
1.	Increase the accessibility of residential development and construction to a range of households, 
2.	Encourage visual uniqueness and architectural variation, and 
3.	Promote inclusionary development undominated by a single dwelling unit type or size within a narrow range of price points and densities. 
b.	Applicability. The standards outlined in this section shall apply to all building and development activities of the following land uses: 
1.	A development containing townhomes, 
2.	A reconfiguration plat containing 4 or more R-zoned lots, and 
3.	A cottage courtyard development. 
c.	Standards. The development design shall be required to provide for a variety of residential unit sizes. 
1.	A minimum of 50 percent of the total planned dwelling units shall vary in size from the other dwelling units by at least 500 square feet. 
2.	A maximum of 50 percent of the total planned dwelling units may have the same number of bedrooms. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.148), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2022-09-03, § I, 9-27-2022; Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, 12-19-2023)
Sec. 27-589. Group living.
Group living is residential occupancy of a building or any portion of a building by a group other than a household. Tenancy is arranged on a long-term (at least 30-day) basis. Buildings or spaces occupied by group living uses contain individual rooms with private or shared bathroom facilities and may also contain shared kitchen facilities, and/or common dining and living areas for residents. Residents may or may not receive any combination of care, training, or treatment, but those receiving such services shall reside at the site. 
(1)	Assisted living. An establishment registered with the State of Georgia as an assisted living home. 
(2)	Nursing home. An establishment providing inpatient, skilled nursing and rehabilitative services to patients who require health care but not hospital services. Care is ordered by and under the direction of a physician. 
(3)	Personal care home. The use of a dwelling unit to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services, including watchful oversight, for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. "Personal services" include assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming and dressing. Personal care homes do not provide skilled nursing or other medical services or admit and retain residents who need continuous medical or nursing care. 
(4)	Shelter, temporary. The provision of overnight housing and sleeping accommodations for persons who have no permanent residence and are in need of temporary, short-term housing assistance, and in which may also be provided meals and social services including counseling services. Temporary shelters in the RM-14 district are limited to a maximum capacity of six persons, not counting staff. 
(5)	Transitional housing. The provision of long-term but not permanent living accommodations for persons who have no permanent residence and are in need of long-term housing assistance. Transitional housing in the RM-14 district is limited to a maximum capacity of six persons, not counting staff. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.149), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-590—27-599. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Sec. 27-600. Cemetery.
Lands and facilities for the interment of humans or domestic household pets, including columbariums and mausoleums. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.150), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-601. Club or lodge.
The use of a building or lot by a membership-based organization that restricts access to its facility to bona fide, dues-paying members and their occasional guests and in which the primary activity is a service not carried on as a business enterprise. Private clubs and lodges are characterized by definite membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings and a constitution and bylaws. Examples include country clubs and fraternal organizations. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.151), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-602. College or university.
Academic institutions of higher learning that are accredited or recognized by the state and offer courses of general or specialized study. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.152), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-603. Heliport.
An area at ground level or on a building, licensed by the federal government or an appropriate state agency and approved for the loading, landing, and takeoff of helicopters. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.153), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-604. Hospital.
Uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and offering inpatient (overnight) care. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.154), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-605. Library or cultural exhibit.
Museum-like preservation and exhibition of objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, gallery exhibition of works of art or library collections of books, manuscripts and similar materials operated by a public or quasi-public agency. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.155), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-606. Reserved.
Sec. 27-607. Religious assembly.
(a)	Definition. Buildings used for conducting organized religious services. Examples include synagogues, temples, mosques and churches. 
(b)	Supplemental regulations. The following supplemental regulations apply to religious assembly uses: 
(1)	Any uses, buildings or structures operated in conjunction with a religious assembly use are allowed only in zoning districts where those ancillary uses are allowed. Such uses shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations, including any requirement for obtaining approval of a special land use permit. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.157), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-608. Safety service.
Establishments that provide fire, police or life protection services, together with the incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include fire stations and police stations. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.158), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-609. School.
Public and private schools at the primary, elementary, middle school or high school level that provide basic, compulsory, state-mandated education. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.159), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-610. Utilities and public service facilities.
(a)	Minor. Infrastructure services that require location in or very near the area where the service is provided. Minor utilities and public service facilities do not regularly have employees at the site and typically have few if any impacts on surrounding areas. Typical uses include: underground electric distribution substations; electric transformers; water conveyance systems; stormwater facilities and conveyance systems; telephone switching equipment and emergency communication warning/broadcast facilities. 
(b)	Major. Infrastructure services that typically have substantial visual or operational impacts on nearby areas. Typical uses include high-voltage electric substations, utility-scale power generation facilities and utility-scale water storage facilities, such as water towers and reservoirs. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.160), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-611—27-620. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. COMMERCIAL USES
Sec. 27-621. Animal service.
Uses that provide goods and services for care of animals, including the following specific use types: 
(1)	Definitions.
 a.	Boarding. The keeping of and care for any number of companion animals for remuneration or profit. Typical uses include boarding kennels, pet resorts/hotels, doggy or pet day care facilities, foster care homes, dog training centers and animal rescue shelters. Any building or structure in which animals are kept or exercised shall be set back at least 100 feet from any R-zoned lot. 
b.	Grooming. Grooming of companion animals, including dog bathing and clipping salons and pet grooming shops. No outside animal runs or kennels are allowed unless located in a zoning district that permits boarding, in which case the regulations that apply to animal boarding shall be met. 
c.	Veterinary. Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics staffed by veterinarians. No outside animal runs or kennels are allowed unless located in a zoning district that permits boarding, in which case the regulations that apply to an animal boarding shall be met. 
(2)	Development standards.
 a.	All animal service uses shall provide animal waste management plans to ensure animal waste is properly discharged per chapter 25 of the local ordinance and in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. Animals waste management plans shall be reviewed during the permitting process. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.161), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. Z2024-04-03, (TA24-02), 4-25-2024)
Sec. 27-622. Assembly and entertainment.
Buildings and other facilities that accommodate public assembly for spectator-oriented sports, amusement, or entertainment events. Typical uses include event centers, theaters and cinemas. 
(1)	Small. Assembly and entertainment uses with a seating or occupant capacity of no more than 250 persons. 
(2)	Large. Assembly and entertainment uses with a seating or occupant capacity of more than 250 persons. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.162), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-623. Business or trade school.
Uses in an enclosed building that focus on teaching the skills needed to perform a particular job. Examples include schools of cosmetology, modeling academies, computer training facilities, vocational schools, administrative business training facilities and similar uses. Schools and other training facilities that involve outdoor work or training activities are classified as industrial services. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.163), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-624. Commercial service.
Uses that provide low-impact repair, maintenance and improvement services to individual consumers and small businesses. 
(1)	Consumer maintenance and repair service. Uses that provide maintenance, cleaning and repair services for consumer goods on a site other than that of the customer (i.e., customers bring goods to the site of the repair/maintenance business). Typical uses include tailors, taxidermists, dressmakers, shoe repair, picture framing shops, copy shops, locksmiths, vacuum repair shops, electronics repair shops and similar establishments. Business that offer repair and maintenance service for large equipment or technicians who visit customers' homes or places of business are classified as an "industrial service." 
(2)	Laundry facilities. A commercial laundering establishment which cleans clothing, carpeting, drapes, and other cloth or synthetic fiber materials. Such establishments may also include self-service laundering facilities. 
a.	Development standards. 
1.	Limits of disturbance for this use shall be prohibited within 75-feet of a state waters feature. The 75-foot distance threshold shall be measured from the point of wrested vegetation or the outer edge of a seawall adjoining a state waters feature. See also section 27-1092. 
(3)	Personal service. Uses that provide personal support and improvement services. Typical uses include barbers, hair and nail salons, tanning salons, travel agencies, and day spas. Also includes uses involved in providing tattoos, piercing and similar forms of body art. 
(4)	Studio or instructional service. Uses that focus on providing individual or small group instruction or training in fine arts, music, dance, drama, fitness, language or similar activities. Also includes dance studios, ballet academies, yoga studios, martial arts instruction, tutoring, photography studios and other studios for artists that do not involve the use of power tools or power machinery. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.164), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-04, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-625. Day care.
(a)	Definition. Uses providing care and supervision for children or adults away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day. 
(1)	Small day care. A day care use for six or fewer individuals. 
(2)	Large day care. A day care use for seven or more individuals. 
(b)	Supplemental regulations. The following supplemental regulations apply to day care uses. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the regulations apply to small and large day cares. 
(1)	All small day care uses shall provide at least 30 square feet of indoor activity area and at least 100 square feet of outdoor activity area per enrollee, based on maximum capacity. 
(2)	No more than 50 percent of the floor area of a dwelling unit may be used for an allowed day care use. 
(3)	All required outdoor activity areas for all day care uses shall be enclosed by a fence or wall at least four feet in height. 
(4)	No dwelling unit in which a day care use is conducted may be modified to alter its appearance as a residential building. This provision is expressly intended to prohibit the posting of exterior signs or graphics on the property. 
(5)	New day care uses may not be established in RS, RSA or RM districts if located within 1,000 feet of another day care use. 
(6)	All day care uses shall comply with applicable off-street parking regulations and provide safe vehicle turnaround areas on the subject lot. 
(7)	No permit allowing the operation of a day care use may be issued until the applicant has provided proof that all required state permits have been obtained. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.165), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-626. Eating and drinking places.
An establishment that serves food or beverages for on- or off-premises consumption as its principal business. 
(1)	Restaurant. An establishment that serves food or beverages for on- or off-premises consumption as its principal business. Typical examples of restaurant uses include principal use restaurants, cafés, cafeterias, ice cream/yogurt shops, donut shops and coffee shops. 
(2)	Bar. Uses that cater primarily to adults, 21 years of age and older and that sell and serve beer, wine or alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption as their principal business. Typical uses include bars, taverns, brewpubs, tasting rooms and nightclubs. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.166), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-627. Financial service.
Uses related to the exchange, lending, borrowing and safe-keeping of money. Automatic teller machines, kiosks and similar facilities that do not have on-site employees or amplified sound are not classified as financial service uses if they meet the criteria for classification as an accessory use (see article VII, division 11). Typical examples of financial service use types are federally chartered banks, credit unions, convenient cash businesses and pawnshops: 
(1)	Convenient cash business. A check cashing establishment, precious metal broker other substantially similar business. 
a.	Check cashing establishment. An establishment licensed by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-700 et seq. Check cashing establishments are subject to the following supplemental regulations: 
1.	Lots on which check cashing establishments are located shall have frontage on an arterial street. 
2.	New check cashing establishments are prohibited within 1,000 feet of an existing check cashing establishment or pawn shop. 
3.	Check cashing establishments shall operate as an independent principal use and not be combined with any other use. 
b.	Precious metal broker. An establishment engaged in whole or in part in the business of buying gold, precious metals or jewelry. 
(2)	Pawnshop. An entity engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130(5)), or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on a condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.167), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-628. Funeral and mortuary service.
Uses that provide services related to the death of a human or companion animal, including funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.168), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-629. Lodging.
Uses that provide temporary overnight sleeping accommodations or lodging for guests paying a fee or other form of compensation for a period of less than 30 consecutive days. Lodging uses sometimes provide food or entertainment, primarily to registered guests. Lodging use types include: bed and breakfast inns, hotels and motels and short-term rentals. 
(1)	Bed and breakfast inn. A lodging establishment in a detached house in which the resident owner/operator offers accommodations and meal service to overnight guests for compensation. Unless otherwise approved through approval of a special land use permit, the following supplemental regulations apply to bed and breakfast inns: 
a.	The length of stay in for guests in a bed and breakfast inn may not exceed seven continuous days, and guests may not re-register for at least 30 days from the termination of their previous stay. 
b.	The bed and breakfast inn shall be occupied by the owner or renter of the principal dwelling unit. 
c.	The minimum lot area required for a bed and breakfast use is 20,000 square feet. The detached house in which the use is located shall have floor area of at least 2,500 square feet. 
d.	No separate kitchen facilities are allowed. 
e.	At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each bedroom in bed and breakfast inn. 
f.	The residential character of the dwelling shall be maintained. 
g.	Meals may be served only to members of the household occupying the principal dwelling unit the and to registered guests of the bed and breakfast inn. 
h.	Business and accounting records of the facility shall be made available to the city upon request to verify compliance with regulations. 
(2)	Hotel or motel. A lodging establishment other than a bed and breakfast inn or short-term rental. Guest rooms in hotels are accessed via internal corridors, while motels provide access directly from the exterior to each guest room. 
(3)	Short-term Rental. The use of an owner-occupied residential dwelling unit or portion of such dwelling unit for lodging. The following supplemental regulations apply to short-term rentals: 
a.	Permit required. No person shall rent, lease or otherwise exchange for compensation all or any portion of a dwelling unit as short-term rental, as defined in this Code, without first obtaining a permit from the department of community development and complying with the regulations contained in this section. Nopermit issued under this chapter may be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued, or at any location other than the one for which it is issued, or at any location other than the one for which it is issued. An applicant may receive only one license per year from the city for short-term rentals. Applicants cannot have any interest of any kind in more than one property that is licensed by the city for short-term rentals. 
b.	Application for permit. Applicants shall submit, on an annual basis, an application for a short-term rental permit to the department of community development. Such application shall include: 
1.	The name, address, telephone and email address of the owner(s) of record of the dwelling unit for which a certificate is sought. Applicants shall be limited to owner-occupiers receiving a current homestead exemption through DeKalb County for the property to be rented; 
2.	The address of the dwelling unit to be used as a short-term rental; 
3.	The name, address, telephone number and email address of the short-term rental agent, which shall constitute his or her 24-hour contact information; 
4.	The owner's sworn acknowledgement that he or she has received a copy of this section and all other laws pertaining to short-term rentals, has reviewed such laws, and understands their requirements; 
5.	The number and location of parking spaces allotted to the premises; 
6.	The owner's agreement to use his or her best efforts to assure that use of the premises by short-term rental occupants will not disrupt the neighborhood, and will not interfere with the rights of neighboring property owners to the quiet enjoyment of their properties; and 
7.	Any other information that this chapter requires the owner to provide to the city as part of an application for a short-term rental permit. The department of community development shall have the authority to obtain additional information from the applicant as necessary to achieve the objectives of this chapter. 
8.	If the rental agent changes, the property owner shall notify the city within five business days. 
9.	Application fees shall be as established by the city council. 
10.	As part of the application, applicants must provide proof of insurance for the property to be used as a short-term rental. 
11.	Applicants must state which marketplace facilitator(s) the applicant intends to contract with or contracts with for short-term rental of the applicant's property. If the applicant/owner changes the marketplace facilitator for the short-term rental property, the applicant/owner must notify the city of the change and new marketplace facilitator. 
c.	All short-term rentals shall be subject to excise tax pursuant to chapter 24 of the Code of the City of Brookhaven. 
d.	All short-term rentals shall be subject to nuisance and noise regulations pursuant to chapter 16 of the Code of the City of Brookhaven. 
e.	The city manager or their designee shall conduct a reasonable search of the city's records to determine if the applicant property has been the subject of two or more citations for a violation of the Code of the city in the preceding calendar year. If the search reveals two or more citations, without regard to a finding of adjudication of guilt, the permit shall not be renewed. 
f.	No property authorized by this subsection for short term rentals may list the property for such use for more than 180 days per calendar year. 
g.	Short-term rentals shall be limited to five percent of the residential parcels within each city council district. Holders of a short-term rental permit before October 24, 2023 ("Pre-Existing Permit") that seek renewal of a pre-existing permit shall not be denied on the grounds that issuance of the permit will exceed the per-district maximum cap limitation. When a transfer of property title occurs for a parcel with a pre-existing permit(s), a new application from the transferee/grantee shall not be denied on the grounds that the issuance of the permit(s) will exceed the per-district maximum cap limitation if the transferee/grantee applies for the new short-term vacation rental permit(s) within six months from the date of title transfer. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.169), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-04-02, § II, 4-23-2019; Ord. No. 2019-07-03, § I(Attch.), 7-23-2019; Ord. No. RZ-2023-10-06, § I, 10-24-2023)
Sec. 27-630. Medical service.
Personal health services including prevention, diagnosis and treatment services for humans, as provided by physicians, dentists, nurses and other health personnel. Medical service uses are performed in an office setting with no overnight care. Typical uses include offices of physicians, dentists, psychiatrists, psychologists, physical therapists and chiropractors. Surgical, rehabilitation and other medical centers that do not involve overnight patient stays are included in this use subcategory, as are medical and dental laboratories, blood banks and kidney dialysis centers, unless otherwise expressly indicated. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.170), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-631. Office.
Uses that focus on providing executive, management, administrative and professional services other than those included in the medical service use subcategory. Also includes broadcast and recording studios and uses engaged in scientific research and testing services leading to the development of new products and processes that do not involve the mass production, distribution or sale of such products. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.171), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-632. Parking, non-accessory.
Parking that is not provided to comply with minimum off-street parking requirements and that is not provided exclusively to serve occupants of or visitors to a particular use, but rather is available to the public at-large. A facility that provides both accessory parking and non-accessory parking is classified as non-accessory parking. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.172), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-633. Retail sales.
Uses involving the sale, lease or rental of new or used goods to the ultimate consumer. Examples of specific retail use types include retail sales of convenience goods, consumer shopping goods and building supplies and equipment. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.173), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-634. Sexually oriented businesses.
(a)	Defined. Sexually oriented businesses are adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult cabarets, adult motion picture theaters, semi-nude model studios, or sexual device shops, as those terms are defined in section 15-497 of this Code. 
(b)	Supplemental regulations.
(1)	Purpose. It is a purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(2)	Findings and rationale.
a.	Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Sewell v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 982 (1978); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989); and Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); Peek-a-Boo Lounge v. Manatee County, 630 F.3d 1346 (11th Cir. 2011); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Jacksonville Property Rights Ass'n, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 635 F.3d 1266 (11th Cir. 2011); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. Pryor, 240 F.3d 944 (11th Cir. 2001); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004); Williams v. Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2002); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); 5634 E. Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd, 2008 WL 4276370 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curiam); Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214 (1978); Imaginary Images, Inc. v. Evans, 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Ocello v. Koster, 354 S.W.3d 187 (Mo. 2011); 84 Video/Newsstand, Inc. v. Sartini, 2011 WL 3904097 (6th Cir. Sept. 7, 2011); Plaza Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877 N.E.2d 877 (Ind. Ct. App. 2007); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County, 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); DCR, Inc. v. Pierce County, 964 P.2d 380 (Wash. Ct. App. 1998); City of New York v. Hommes, 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999); Taylor v. State, No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Fantasyland Video, Inc. v. County of San Diego, 505 F.3d 996 (9th Cir. 2007); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Starship Enters. of Atlanta, Inc. v. Coweta County, No. 3:09-CV-123, R. 41 (N.D. Ga. Feb. 28, 2011); High Five Investments, LLC v. Floyd County, No. 4:06-CV-190, R. 128 (N.D. Ga. Mar. 14, 2008); 10950 Retail, LLC v. Fulton County, No. 1:06-CV-1923, R. 62 Order (N.D. Ga. Dec. 21, 2006); 10950 Retail, LLC v. Fulton County, No. 1:06-CV-1923, R. 84 Contempt Order (N.D. Ga. Jan. 4, 2007); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton, Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion's Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); Goldrush II v. City of Marietta, 267 Ga. 683 (1997); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, "Correlates of Current Transactional Sex among a Sample of Female Exotic Dancers in Baltimore, MD," Journal of Urban Health (2011); "Does the Presence of Sexually Oriented Businesses Relate to Increased Levels of Crime?" Crime & Delinquency (2012) (Louisville, KY); Metropolis, Illinois - 2011-12; Manatee County, Florida - 2007; Hillsborough County, Florida - 2006; Clarksville, Indiana - 2009; El Paso, Texas - 2008; Memphis, Tennessee - 2006; New Albany, Indiana - 2009; Louisville, Kentucky - 2004; Fulton County, GA - 2001; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Jackson County, Missouri - 2008; Ft. Worth, Texas - 2004; Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Houston, Texas - 1997, 1983; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98, 1979; Tucson, Arizona - 1990; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Dallas, Texas - 2007; "Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Businesses," 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008); "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000; Law Enforcement and Private Investigator Affidavits (Pink Pony South, Forest Park, GA, and Adult Cabarets in Sandy Springs, GA), the city council finds: 
b.	Sexually oriented businesses, as a subcategory of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects. 
c.	Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
d.	Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this section, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this section are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
e.	The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(3)	Prohibited locations. It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city that is located: 
a.	Within 100 feet of another sexually oriented business; or 
b.	Within 300 feet of a residential district, religious assembly use, park, or public library. 
(4)	Measurements.
a.	Measurement of the required spacing between sexually oriented businesses shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, between the closest points on the property lines of the two sexually oriented businesses. 
b.	Measurement of the required spacing between a sexually oriented business and a residential district, religious assembly use, park, or public library shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of the structure containing the sexually oriented business to the closest point on the boundary line of the residential district or the closest point on the property line of the religious assembly use, park, or public library. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.174), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-635. Sports and recreation, participant.
Provision of sports or recreation primarily by and for participants. (Spectators are incidental). Examples include bowling alleys, health clubs, skating rinks, billiard parlors, miniature golf courses, batting cages, and go-cart tracks. 
(1)	Indoor. Participant sports and recreation uses conducted entirely within buildings. 
(2)	Outdoor. Participant sports and recreation uses conducted wholly or partially outside of buildings. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.175), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-636. Vehicle fuel station.
(a)	Definitions. Fuel stations are uses engaged in retail sale of vehicle fuels for personal vehicles, other than fleet fueling facilities and truck stops, which are regulated as industrial service uses. 
(b)	Supplemental regulations.
(1)	Applicability. The following supplemental regulations shall apply whenever a fuel station meets one or more of the following conditions, unless otherwise specified: 
a.	A new fuel station is proposed; 
b.	An existing fuel station increases pumping capacity through the addition of hoses and/or pumps; 
c.	The site of an existing fuel station is expanded in size or reconfigured to allow such expansion. 
(2)	Development standards.
a.	Location 
(i)	There shall be a minimum distance of 500 feet measured from the nearest points between property lines of a proposed fuel station and any existing fuel station located on the same side of the road. 
b.	Minimum Frontage and Area. No fuel stations shall be constructed or expanded on a lot that does not meet the minimum lot width & frontage and minimum lot area requirements. 
c.	Siting. 
(i)	Front setback. 
i.	The principal building shall maintain a front setback between 5-feet and 20-feet from the back edge of the pedestrian zone. 
ii.	The Community Development Director is authorized to determine which line is the front lot line on lots with multiple frontages. 
(ii)	The principal building shall be designed to provide a visual screen of fuel pumps from the pedestrian zone of the highest classified street. 
d.	Design. 
1.	Transparency.
i.	At minimum, 35 percent of each exterior building facade shall be covered by windows or transparent, glazed elements. 
ii.	The Brookhaven Arts and Culture Commission shall be authorized to waive up to 25 of the 35 percent transparency requirement to allow installation of one contiguous mural affixed to an exterior building facade that directly faces and is fully visible from a public right-of-way, a pedestrian streetscape zone, or a publicly accessible open space area. 
2.	Materials. 
i.	Exterior building materials excluding architectural accents, windows and other glazed elements, or roofing, shall be primarily brick, wood, stucco, or stone. Masonry shall wrap corners to avoid appearance of being applied. 
ii.	Architectural metals, including architectural metal panels, architectural metal cladding, metal mesh, and perforated metal, textured concrete masonry, cementitious fiberboard, or EIFS siding may be used as exterior building materials, but shall not constitute the majority of any side of a building. 
3.	Building massing.
i.	Every building shall reduce its perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller scale components. Building walls exceeding 80 continuous linear feet shall utilize offsets, such as projections, recesses, changes in floor level, or other distinctive changes in the building facade. 
e.	Stream buffer. 
1.	Limits of disturbance for this use shall be prohibited within 75-feet of a state waters feature. The 75-foot distance threshold shall be measured from the point of wrested vegetation or the outer edge of a seawall adjoining a state waters feature. See also Section 27-1092. 
(c)	Permitting requirements.
(1)	In addition to all regular requirements of regular permitting and/or a Special Land Use Permit, the following documentation must be submitted during the Special Land Use Permit Process or permitting process: 
a.	Traffic Impact Analysis; 
b.	Phase I Environmental Site Assessment; 
c.	Documentation demonstrating that all gasoline bulk storage containers on site meet all current Federal and State Environmental Protection regulations. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.176), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-04, § I, 6-28-2023)
Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-04, § I, adopted June 28, 2023, amended the title of § 6-36 to read as herein set out. The former § 6-36 title pertained to vehicles sales and service. 
Sec. 27-637. Vehicle sales and rentals.
(a)	Defined.
(1)	Vehicle sales. Uses primarily engaged in the sales of personal, consumer-oriented motor vehicles, such as automobiles, pick-up trucks, motorcycles and personal watercraft. Note: the sale of large trucks, construction equipment, agricultural equipment, aircraft or similar large vehicles are regulated as trucking and transportation terminals. 
(2)	Vehicle rentals. Uses primarily engaged in the rental of personal, consumer-oriented motor vehicles, such as automobiles, pick-up trucks, motorcycles and personal watercraft. Note: the rental of large trucks, construction equipment, agricultural equipment, aircraft or similar large vehicles are regulated as trucking and transportation terminals. 
(b)	Supplemental regulations.
(1)	Applicability. The following supplemental regulations shall apply whenever a vehicle sales or rental use meets one or more of the following conditions: 
a.	A new vehicle sales or rental use is proposed; 
b.	An existing vehicle sales or rental use increases their facilities to increase number of cars stored on property; 
c.	The site of an existing vehicle sales or rental use is expanded in size or reconfigured to allow such expansion. 
(2)	Development standards. 
a.	Paved parking surfaces. All surfaces where vehicles are stored or displayed for sale, rental or lease and all parking areas shall be paved. All parking areas shall be in compliance with the Landscaping and Screening Requirements of Article IX. 
b.	Storage and inoperable vehicles. No outside storage of parts or parking of non-operable vehicles or vehicles with body damage shall be permitted. 
c.	Unloading zone. The establishment shall provide space on the lot devoted specifically and exclusively for automobile or other vehicle loading and unloading, as approved by the Community Development Director. It shall be unlawful to load or unload automobiles or other vehicles intended for sale, lease, rental, service, or repair at the facility within the right-of-way of any public street. It shall be unlawful to park cars within or otherwise encroach upon the designated and approved loading or unloading zone except for loading and unloading operations. 
d.	Display of vehicles. The maximum number of vehicles for sale or rent stored on site shall be restricted by the available spaces on site that are in excess of the required parking spaces established in Sec. 27-744. 
e.	Design. 
1.	Transparency. 
(i)	At minimum, 35 percent of each exterior building facade shall be covered by windows or transparent, glazed elements. 
(ii)	The Brookhaven Arts and Culture Commission shall be authorized to waive up to 25 of the 35 percent transparency requirement to allow installation of one contiguous mural affixed to an exterior building facade that directly faces and is fully visible from a public right-of-way, a pedestrian streetscape zone, or a publicly accessible open space area. 
2.	Materials. 
(i)	Exterior building materials excluding architectural accents, windows and other glazed elements, or roofing, shall be primarily brick, wood, stucco, or stone. Masonry shall wrap corners to avoid appearance of being applied. 
(ii)	Architectural metals, including architectural metal panels, architectural metal cladding, metal mesh, and perforated metal, textured concrete masonry, cementitious fiberboard, or EIFS siding may be used as exterior building materials, but shall not constitute the majority of any side of a building. 
3.	Building massing. 
(i)	Every building shall reduce its perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller scale components. Building walls exceeding 80 continuous linear feet shall utilize offsets, such as projections, recesses, changes in floor level, or other distinctive changes in the building facade. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.180), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-04, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-638. Vehicle maintenance and repair.
(a)	Defined.
(1)	Vehicle maintenance and repair, minor. Uses that repair, install or maintain the mechanical components of automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers or motorcycles or that wash, clean or otherwise protect the exterior or interior surfaces of such vehicles. Typical examples include oil-change shops, muffler shops, tire shops, and auto repair shops providing motor and mechanical repair services. 
(2)	Vehicle maintenance and repair, major. Uses that primarily conduct motor vehicle body work and repairs or that apply paint to the exterior or interior surfaces of motor vehicles by spraying, dipping, flow-coating or other similar means. Typical examples include body and paint shops. 
(b)	Supplemental regulations.
(1)	Applicability. The following supplemental regulations shall apply whenever a vehicle maintenance and repair use meets one or more of the following conditions: 
a.	A new vehicle maintenance and repair use is proposed; 
b.	An existing vehicle maintenance and repair use increases their facilities; 
c.	The site of an existing vehicle maintenance and repair use is expanded in size or reconfigured to allow such expansion. 
(2)	Location. 
a.	There shall be a minimum distance of 500 feet measured from the nearest points between property lines of vehicle maintenance and repair uses. 
(3)	Development standards. 
a.	Paved parking surfaces. All surfaces where vehicles are stored or displayed and all parking areas shall be paved. All parking areas shall be in compliance with the Landscaping and Screening Requirements of Article IX. 
b.	Storage and inoperable vehicles. No outside storage of parts or parking of non operable vehicles or vehicles with body damage shall be permitted. 
c.	Service bays. If the establishment provides for the servicing or repair of vehicles, service bays with overhead doors shall not be located on the front building facade of a building unless provisions are made for screening them from view from the front property line. Service bay must have the ability to be enclosed and must be closed once car enters. 
d.	Unloading zone. The establishment shall provide space on the lot devoted specifically and exclusively for automobile or other vehicle loading and unloading, as approved by the Community Development Director. It shall be unlawful to load or unload automobiles or other vehicles intended for sale, lease, rental, service, or repair at the facility within the right-of-way of any public street. It shall be unlawful to park cars within or otherwise encroach upon the designated and approved loading or unloading zone except for loading and unloading operations. 
e.	Design. 
1.	Transparency. 
(i)	At minimum, 35 percent of each exterior building facade shall be covered by windows or transparent, glazed elements. 
(ii)	The Brookhaven Arts and Culture Commission shall be authorized to waive up to 25 of the 35 percent transparency requirement to allow installation of one contiguous mural affixed to an exterior building facade that directly faces and is fully visible from a public right-of-way, a pedestrian streetscape zone, or a publicly accessible open space area. 
2.	Materials. 
(i)	Exterior building materials excluding architectural accents, windows and other glazed elements, or roofing, shall be primarily brick, wood, stucco, or stone. Masonry shall wrap corners to avoid appearance of being applied. 
(ii)	Architectural metals, including architectural metal panels, architectural metal cladding, metal mesh, and perforated metal, textured concrete masonry, cementitious fiberboard, or EIFS siding may be used as exterior building materials, but shall not constitute the majority of any side of a building. 
3.	Building massing. 
(i)	Every building shall reduce its perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller scale components. Building walls exceeding 80 continuous linear feet shall utilize offsets, such as projections, recesses, changes in floor level, or other distinctive changes in the building facade. 
f.	Wastewater and recycled water. 
1.	Wastewater from all automobile wash services shall be pretreated in accordance with the DeKalb County Department of Watershed Management (DWM) standards prior to being drained into the public sanitary sewer as may be approved by DeKalb County Department of Watershed Management and Brookhaven Department of Community Development. 
2.	All new commercial car washes constructed after [effective date of ordinance] where the car moves on a conveyor belt or moves via mechanical means during the wash must install an operational recycled water system that captures, and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. The recycled water system must recycle a minimum of 50 percent of water utilized by the commercial car wash. 
g.	Stream buffer. 
1.	Limits of disturbance for this use shall be prohibited within 75-feet of a state waters feature. The 75-foot distance threshold shall be measured from the point of wrested vegetation or the outer edge of a seawall adjoining a state waters feature. See also section 27-1092. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-04, § I, 6-28-2023)
Secs. 27-639—27-646. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. INDUSTRIAL USES
Sec. 27-647. Data processing.
A building, dedicated space within a building (that constitutes at least 50% of the floor area within a building), or group of structures used to house a large group of computer systems and associated components, such as telecommunications and data processing systems, to be used for the remote storage, processing, or distribution of large amounts of data. Examples of such data include, but are not limited to, computationally-intensive applications such as blockchain technology, cryptocurrency mining, weather modeling, genome sequencing, etc. Such facilities may also include air handlers, power generators, water cooling and storage facilities, utility substations, and other associated utility infrastructure to support operations. Sometimes referred to as a "Data Center," "Data Processing Facility," "Data Storage Center," "Server Farm," "High Density Load Service," "Cryptocurrency Mine," or similar. 
(a)	Applicability. The following supplemental regulations shall apply to all data processing use(s) meeting one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)	Location of a new data processing use; 
(2)	Expansion of an existing data processing use within a building or site; 
(3)	Expansion of a building or site containing an existing data processing use. 
(b)	Development standards.
(1)	Location. All equipment and structures associated with data processing uses shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the property line. 
(2)	Stream buffer. Structures associated with use shall be prohibited within 200-feet of a state waters feature. The 200-foot distance threshold shall be measured from the point of wrested vegetation or the outer edge of a seawall adjoining a state waters feature. 
(3)	Design. 
a.	Transparency. 
i.	At minimum, 35 percent of each exterior building facade shall be covered by windows or transparent, glazed elements. 
ii.	The Brookhaven Arts and Culture Commission shall be authorized to waive up to 25 of the 35 percent transparency requirement to allow installation of one contiguous mural affixed to an exterior building facade that directly faces and is fully visible from a public right-of-way, a pedestrian streetscape zone, or a publicly accessible open space area. 
b.	Materials. 
i.	Exterior building materials excluding architectural accents, windows and other glazed elements, or roofing, shall be primarily brick, wood, stucco, or stone. Masonry shall wrap corners to avoid appearance of being applied. 
ii.	Architectural metals, including architectural metal panels, architectural metal cladding, metal mesh, and perforated metal, textured concrete masonry, cementitious fiberboard, or EIFS siding may be used as exterior building materials, but shall not constitute the majority of any side of a building. 
c.	Building massing. Every building shall reduce its perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller scale components. Building walls exceeding 80 continuous linear feet shall utilize offsets, such as projections, recesses, changes in floor level/roof line, or other distinctive changes in the building facade. 
d.	Screening. In order to minimize visibility from adjacent roads and adjacent properties, ground level and roof top mechanical equipment and loading areas shall be screened in accordance with Chapter 27, Article IX. 
(Ord. No. 2024-02-01, § I, 2-27-2024)
Sec. 27-648. Fabrication and production.
Uses primarily involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or for firms or consumers. 
(1)	Artisan. Uses involved in the creation of art works or custom goods by hand manufacturing involving the use of hand tools and small-scale, light mechanical equipment in a completely enclosed building with no outdoor operations, storage or regular commercial truck parking/loading, but which may include retail sales of goods produced on on-site. 
(2)	Limited. Uses that process, fabricate, assemble, treat, or package finished parts or products without the use of explosive or petroleum materials. This subcategory does not include the assembly of large equipment and machinery and has very limited external impacts in terms of noise, vibration, odor, hours of operation, and traffic. Common examples include apparel manufacturing, bakery products manufacturing, bottling plants, ice manufacturing, mattress manufacturing and assembly, microbreweries, micro distilleries, musical instrument manufacturing, newspaper printing and binderies. 
(3)	General. Uses that process, fabricate, assemble, or treat materials for the production of large equipment and machines as well as fabrication and production uses that because of their scale or method of operation regularly produce odors, dust, noise, vibration, truck traffic or other external impacts that are detectable beyond the property lines of the subject property. Common examples include dairy products manufacturing, foundries, chrome plating, crematoriums, electroplating, fiberglass manufacturing, flour mills and paper products manufacturing. Uses that regularly use hazardous chemicals or procedures or produce hazardous byproducts are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.177), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2024-02-01, § I, 2-27-2024)
Sec. 27-649. Industrial service.
Uses engaged in the maintenance, repair or servicing of industrial, business or consumer machinery. Examples include janitorial, carpet cleaning, extermination, plumbing, electrical, window cleaning and similar building maintenance services; welding shops; machine shops; heavy truck servicing and repair; publishing and lithography; redemption centers; laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants; photofinishing laboratories and maintenance and repair services that are not otherwise classified. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.178), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2024-02-01, § I, 2-27-2024)
Sec. 27-650. Junk or salvage yard.
A building or open area where waste, scrap, used or second-hand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, crushed, processed, or handled for reclamation, disposal or other similar purposes, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.180), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-04, § I, 6-28-2023; Ord. No. 2024-02-01, § I, 2-27-2024)
Sec. 27-651. Storage, distribution and wholesaling.
Uses involved in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms or the sale, lease, or rental of goods primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. 
(a)	Equipment and materials storage, outdoor. Uses related to outdoor storage of equipment, products or materials, whether or not stored in containers. 
(b)	Self-service storage. An enclosed use that provides separate, small-scale, self-service storage facilities leased or rented to individuals or small businesses. Facilities are designed and used to accommodate interior access to storage lockers. 
(1)	Supplemental regulations. The following supplemental regulations shall apply whenever a self-service storage use meets one or more of the following conditions: 
a.	A new self-service storage use is proposed; 
b.	An existing self-service storage use increases their facilities; 
c.	The site of an existing self-service storage is expanded in size or reconfigured to allow such expansion; 
(2)	Development standards.
a.	Location. A new or expanded self-storage facility shall be located a minimum of 500 feet measured from the nearest points between property lines of self-storage facility uses (mini or multi). 
b.	Design. 
1.	Transparency. 
(i)	At minimum, 35 percent of each exterior building facade shall be covered by windows or transparent, glazed elements. 
(ii)	The Brookhaven Arts and Culture Commission shall be authorized to waive up to 25 of the 35 percent transparency requirement to allow installation of one contiguous mural affixed to an exterior building facade that directly faces and is fully visible from a public right-of-way, a pedestrian streetscape zone, or a publicly accessible open space area. 
2.	Materials. 
(i)	Exterior building materials excluding architectural accents, windows and other glazed elements, or roofing, shall be primarily brick, wood, stucco, or stone. Masonry shall wrap corners to avoid appearance of being applied. 
(ii)	Architectural metals, including architectural metal panels, architectural metal cladding, metal mesh, and perforated metal, textured concrete masonry, cementitious fiberboard, or EIFS siding may be used as exterior building materials, but shall not constitute the majority of any side of a building. 
3.	Building massing. Every building shall reduce its perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller scale components. Building walls exceeding 80 continuous linear feet shall utilize offsets, such as projections, recesses, changes in floor level, or other distinctive changes in the building facade. 
(c)	Trucking and transportation terminals. Uses engaged in the sales, rental, dispatching or long-term or short-term storage of large trucks, buses, construction equipment agricultural equipment and similar large vehicles, including parcel service delivery vehicles, taxis and limousines. Also includes uses engaged in the moving of household or office furniture, appliances and equipment from one location to another, including the temporary on-site storage of those items. 
(d)	Warehouse. Uses conducted within a completely enclosed building that are engaged in long-term and short-term storage of goods and that do not meet the definition of "self-service storage" use or a "trucking and transportation terminal." 
(e)	Wholesale sales and distribution. Uses engaged in the wholesale sales, bulk storage and distribution of goods. Such uses may also include incidental retail sales and wholesale showrooms. Expressly includes the following uses: bottled gas and fuel oil sales, monument sales, and portable storage building sales. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.179), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-04, § I, 6-28-2023; Ord. No. 2024-02-01, § I, 2-27-2024)
Secs. 27-652—27-660. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. AGRICULTURAL USES
Sec. 27-661. Community garden.
(a)	Defined. Areas that are managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops or non-food crops (e.g., flowers). A community garden area may be divided into separate garden plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group. 
(b)	Supplemental use regulations. Community gardens may be principal or accessory uses and are subject to the following supplemental use regulations: 
(1)	On-site sales of community garden food products is permitted as an accessory use. 
(2)	All equipment shall be stored in a completely enclosed building. 
(3)	The community garden site shall be designed and maintained to prevent any chemical pesticide, fertilizer or other garden waste from draining on to adjacent properties. 
(4)	On-site trash, recyclable and compost containers shall be located and maintained as far as practicable from residential dwelling units located on other lots. 
(5)	One sign is allowed on lots on which an allowed community garden use is located. Such signs may not exceed eight square feet in area and shall include the name and phone number of the property owner or the owner's agent. 
(6)	The property shall be maintained free of tall weeds and debris. Dead garden plants shall be regularly removed and, in any instance, no later than December 1 of each year. 
(7)	The perimeter of all community gardens shall be fenced. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.181), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-662—27-671. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
Sec. 27-672. Wireless communication facility.
The equipment and network components necessary to provide wireless communications service, excluding the underlying wireless support structure. The term includes antennas, accessory equipment, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling and associated equipment necessary to provide wireless communications services. 
(1)	Carrier on wheels. A portable self-contained wireless facility that can be moved to a location and set up to provide wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis. A COW is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the antenna support structure. 
(2)	Co-location. The placement or installation of wireless communication facilities on existing structures, including electrical transmission towers, water towers, buildings and other structures customarily used for and capable of structurally supporting the attachment of wireless communication facilities in compliance with all applicable codes and regulations. 
(3)	Concealed wireless facility. Any wireless communication facility that is integrated as an architectural feature of an existing structure or any new wireless support structure designed to camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers so that the purpose of the facility or wireless support structure is not apparent to a casual observer. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.182), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-673. Wireless support structure.
A freestanding structure, such as a monopole or tower, designed to support wireless communication facilities. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.183), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-674. Supplemental regulations.
(a)	Purpose. The supplemental wireless communications facility regulations of this section are intended to provide for the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring that residents, businesses and public safety operations in Brookhaven have reliable access to telecommunications networks and state of the art mobile broadband communications services while also ensuring that this objective is accomplished in accordance with the overall purposes of this article. 
(b)	State and federal law. The supplemental wireless communication facility regulations of this section shall be applied within the constraints of state and federal law, the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and Section 6409 of the federal Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012. 
(c)	Where allowed. Wireless communication facilities are allowed in accordance with table 7-1. In addition, the following activities are permitted as of right in all districts: 
(1)	Removal or replacement of transmission equipment on an existing wireless support structure that does not result in a substantial modification of the wireless communication facility; 
(2)	Ordinary maintenance of existing wireless communication facilities and wireless support structures; and 
(3)	Distributed antenna systems when located within a building or on the exterior of a building. 
(d)	General regulations.
(1)	Except as otherwise expressly stated, wireless support structure shall be set back from all property lines a distance that is at least equal to its engineered fall zone. 
(2)	Wireless facilities or wireless support structures may not be illuminated or marked unless required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(3)	Signs located at the wireless communication facility are limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna registration number (if required) and any other information as required by government regulation. Any other commercial message is strictly prohibited. 
(4)	Accessory equipment, including any buildings, cabinets or shelters, may be used only to house equipment and other supplies in support of the operation of the wireless communication facility or wireless support structure. Any equipment not used in direct support of such operation may not be stored on the site. 
(5)	Ground-mounted accessory equipment and wireless support structures shall be secured and enclosed with a fence not less than six feet in height. 
(e)	Removal of abandoned antenna and towers. Any wireless support structure that is not actively used by wireless carriers for a continuous period of six consecutive months will be considered abandoned, and the owner of the wireless support structure shall remove it within 60 days of receiving written notice from the city. The city shall ensure and enforce removal by means of its existing regulatory authority, with costs of removal charged to the owner. 
(f)	Existing towers and antennas. Wireless telecommunication facilities lawfully existing on or before the effective date specified in section 27-4, are allowed to remain in place and continue in use and operation. Ordinary maintenance and co-location is permitted, provided than any substantial modification requires review and approval in accordance with the special and use permit procedures of article X, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.184), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-675—27-684. Reserved.
DIVISION 10. OTHER PRINCIPAL USES
Sec. 27-685. Drive-in and drive-through uses.
A use accessory to a principal use that offers service directly to occupants of motor vehicles. Such uses are typically associated with restaurants, banks and pharmacies. Automatic teller machine kiosks and similar drop-off or pick-up facilities that do not have on-site employees or amplified sound are not classified as drive-in or drive-through facilities if they meet the criteria for classification as an accessory use. See also article VIII, division 9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.185), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-686—27-695. Reserved.
DIVISION 11. ACCESSORY USES
Sec. 27-696. Generally applicable regulations.
(a)	Accessory uses allowed. Accessory uses are allowed only in connection with lawfully established principal uses. 
(b)	Allowed uses. Allowed accessory uses are limited to those expressly regulated in this section as well as those that, in the determination of the community development director, satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1)	They are customarily found in conjunction with the principal use of the subject property; 
(2)	They are subordinate and clearly incidental to the principal use of the property; and 
(3)	They serve a necessary function for or contribute to the comfort, safety or convenience of occupants of the principal use. 
(c)	Time of construction and establishment. Accessory uses may be established only after the principal use of the property is in place. 
(d)	Location. Accessory uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal use to which they are accessory, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(e)	Accessory buildings and structures.
(1)	Applicable regulations.
a.	Accessory buildings and structures are subject to the same regulations that apply to principal uses and structures on the subject lot, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
b.	Accessory buildings attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means are considered part of the primary structure and are subject to the lot and building regulations that apply to the principal building. 
c.	Accessory buildings attached by structures less than 30 inches in height or less (e.g., patios, walks, decks without railing) are not considered part of the primary structure and are subject to accessory building and structure regulations. 
(2)	Building separation. Accessory buildings shall be separated by a minimum distance of ten feet from the principal building on the lot, unless the accessory building is located entirely within the principal building setbacks, in which case no separation is required. Structures less than 30 inches in height are not subject to building separation requirements. 
(f)	Exemptions for detached single dwellings. Each lot used or zoned for detached single dwellings are permitted one accessory building or structure up to 120 square feet which is not subject to subsection (e) above. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.186), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-11-03, § I(Attch.), 11-26-2019)
Sec. 27-697. Amateur radio service antennas.
(a)	Amateur radio service antennas and supporting towers are expressly allowed as permitted accessory uses in RS and RSA zoning districts provided that no such antenna, including any support upon which it is mounted may exceed a combined height of 70 feet. Amateur radio service antennas exceeding 70 feet in height may be approved through the special land use permit procedures of article X, division 3 of this chapter. 
(b)	All amateur radio service antenna structures shall be set back a distance of at least one-half the height of the tower structure from all property lines. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.187), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-698. Electric vehicle charging stations.
(a)	General.
(1)	Private (restricted-access) electric-vehicle (EV) charging stations are permitted as accessory uses in all zoning districts. 
(2)	Public EV charging stations are permitted as accessory uses to allowed nonresidential uses in all zoning districts. 
(3)	At least five percent of the required minimum off-street parking in all new developments located in RM, commercial, employment, mixed use, master planned development, or Peachtree Road districts and all new developments designated as residential housing projects shall be electric vehicle parking spaces equipped with public electric vehicle charging stations. 
(4)	All new dwellings located in RS, R3, and RSA districts shall provide EVSE infrastructure to accommodate future installation of EVSE. Said EVSE infrastructure shall: 
a.	Include a raceway, which is continuous from the branch circuit/feeder panel location to the future electric vehicle parking space; 
b.	The raceway shall be a minimum of one inch in size; and, 
c.	The EVSE infrastructure raceway shall include a pull rope or line installed for future conductor installation, with the raceway sealed and labeled for future use. 
(5)	All electric vehicle charging stations and EVSE infrastructure shall be installed per the requirements of the construction and technical codes referenced in chapter 7, buildings and construction, of the Code of the city. 
(b)	Parking.
(1)	Public electric vehicle charging stations may be counted toward satisfying minimum off-street parking space requirements in accordance with section 27-776. 
(2)	Public electric vehicle charging stations shall be reserved for parking and charging electric vehicles. Electric vehicles may be parked in any space designated for public parking, subject to the restrictions that apply to any other vehicle. 
(c)	Equipment.
(1)	Vehicle charging equipment shall be designed and located so as to not impede pedestrian, bicycle or wheelchair movement or create safety hazards on sidewalks. 
(2)	Wheel stops, bollards, or similar device shall be installed to separate vehicles from EVSE. 
(d)	Posted information.
(1)	Information shall be posted identifying voltage and amperage levels and any type of use, fees, or safety information related to the electric vehicle charging station. 
(2)	Public electric vehicle charging stations shall be posted with signage indicating that the space is reserved for electric vehicle charging purposes only. For purposes of this provision, "charging" means that an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is connected to the battery charging station equipment. 
(e)	Maintenance. Electric vehicle charging stations shall be maintained in all respects, including the functioning of the equipment. A phone number or other contact information shall be provided on the equipment for reporting when it is not functioning or other problems are encountered. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.188), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-07-02, § I(Attch.), 7-23-2019)
Sec. 27-699. Geothermal energy systems.
(a)	General. Geothermal energy systems are permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts. 
(b)	Location.
(1)	Geothermal energy systems shall be located entirely within the lot lines of the subject property or within appropriate easements. 
(2)	No portion of a geothermal energy system may be located within a stream or stream buffer. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.189), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-700. Home occupations.
(a)	Purpose. The home occupation regulations of this section are intended to allow residents to engage in customary home-based work activities, while also helping to ensure that neighboring residents are not subjected to adverse operational and land use impacts (e.g., excessive noise or traffic or public safety hazards) that are not typical of residential neighborhoods. 
(b)	Type A and type B home occupations. Two types of home occupations are defined and regulated under this section: 
(1)	Type A home occupations. Type A home occupations are those in which household residents use their home as a place of work, with no employees, customers or clients coming to the site. 
(2)	Type B home occupations. Type B home occupation are those in which household residents use their home as a place of work and either one nonresident employee or customers come to the site. 
(c)	Exemptions.
(1)	Personal care homes. Personal care homes are not permitted as home occupations and are not subject to the home occupation regulations of this section. Personal care homes are allowed as indicated in table 7-1. 
(2)	Day care. Residence-based day care uses are not permitted as home occupations and are not subject to the home occupation regulations of this section. Day care uses are allowed only as indicated in table 7-1. 
(3)	Bed and breakfast inn. Bed and breakfast inns are not permitted as home occupations and are not subject the home occupation regulations of this section. Bed and breakfasts are allowed only as indicated in table 7-1. 
(4)	Short-term rentals. Short-term rentals are not permitted as home occupations and are not subject the home occupation regulations of this section. Short-term rentals are allowed only as indicated in table 7-1. 
(d)	Prohibited home occupations. The following uses are expressly prohibited as home occupations: 
(1)	Any type of assembly, cleaning, maintenance or repair of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines or of large appliances (such as washing machines, clothes dryers or refrigerators); 
(2)	Dispatch centers or other businesses where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; 
(3)	Equipment or supply rental businesses; 
(4)	Taxi, limo, van or bus services; 
(5)	Tow truck services; 
(6)	Firearms sales establishment; 
(7)	Eating or drinking places; 
(8)	Funeral or interment services; 
(9)	Animal care, grooming or boarding businesses; and 
(10)	Any use involving the use or storage of vehicles, products, parts, machinery or similar materials or equipment outside of a completely enclosed building. 
(e)	Where allowed.
(1)	Type A home occupations. Type A home occupations are permitted as of right as an accessory use to a principal use in the household living use category, subject to issuance of an administrative permit in accordance with the procedures of article X, division 9 of this chapter. Type A home occupations are subject to the general regulations of subsection (f) and all other applicable regulations of this section. More than one type A home occupation is allowed as an accessory use, but the general regulations of subsection f apply to the combined home occupation uses. 
(2)	Type B home occupations. Type B home occupations may be approved as an accessory use to a principal use in the household living use category only as expressly stated in subsection (g). Type B home occupations are subject to the general regulations of subsection (f), the supplemental regulations of subsection (g) and all other applicable regulations of this section. Multiple type B home occupations are prohibited as an accessory use to a household living use, and a type A home occupation may not be conducted with a type B home occupation. 
(f)	General regulations. All type A and type B home occupations are subject to the following general regulations: 
(1)	Home occupations shall be accessory and secondary to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. They may not change the character of the residential building they occupy or adversely affect the character of the surrounding neighborhood. Home occupations may not, for example, produce light, noise, vibration, odor, parking demand, or traffic impacts to that are not typical of a residential neighborhood in Brookhaven. Home occupations shall be operated so as not to create or cause a nuisance. 
(2)	Any tools or equipment used as part of a home occupation shall be operated in a manner or sound-proofed so as not to be audible beyond the lot lines of the subject property. 
(3)	External structural alterations or site improvements that change the residential character of the lot upon which a home occupation is located are prohibited. Examples of such prohibited alterations include construction of parking lots, the addition of commercial-like exterior lighting or the addition of a separate building entrance that is visible from abutting streets. 
(4)	Home occupations and all related activities, including storage (other than the lawful parking or storage of vehicles), shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit. 
(5)	The area devoted to the conduct of all home occupations present on the property is limited to 25 percent of the dwelling unit's floor area or 650 square feet, whichever is less. 
(6)	No window display or other public display of any material or merchandise is allowed. 
(7)	The use or storage of hazardous substances is prohibited, except at the "consumer commodity" level, as that term is defined in 49 C.F.R. Section 171.8. 
(8)	Only passenger automobiles, passenger vans and passenger trucks may be used in the conduct of a home occupation. No other types of vehicles may be parked or stored on the premises. This provision is not intended to prohibit deliveries and pickups by common carrier delivery vehicles (e.g., postal service, united parcel service, Fed Ex, et al.) of the type typically used in residential neighborhoods. 
(g)	Use permits and supplemental regulations for type B home occupations. 
(1)	Type B home occupations are allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article X, division 3 of this chapter, provided that instruction, teaching or tutoring of no more than two students at one time does not require approval of a special land use permit, but instead requires issuance of an administrative permit in accordance with he procedures of article X, division 9 of this chapter. 
(2)	One nonresident employee is allowed with a Type B home occupation if no customers come to the site at any time. Home occupations that have clients, customers or students coming to the site at any time may not have nonresident employees. For the purpose of this provision, the term "nonresident employee" includes an employee, business partner, co-owner or any other person affiliated with the home occupation, who does not live at the site, but who visits the site as part of the home occupation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.190), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-701. Outdoor storage.
(a)	Applicability. The outdoor storage regulations of this section apply to the storage of goods, materials and equipment as an accessory use to commercial or industrial use types when located outside of enclosed buildings, including: 
(1)	Merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, or on pallets; 
(2)	Garden supplies, plants, lawn mowers, barbecues and other similar items intended for consumer sales and use; 
(3)	Overnight storage of vehicles awaiting repair (not including new vehicles for sale); 
(4)	Construction and contractor's equipment; 
(5)	Fleet vehicles; and 
(6)	Construction material such as lumber, pipe, steel and unpackaged soil, mulch, recycled material or similar items. 
(b)	Regulations. Outdoor storage is allowed only in CX, EX, C-1, C-2 and M districts and only when screened from view from street rights-of-way and R-zoned properties (See section 27-928). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.191), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-702. Residential composting.
(a)	The composting of landscape waste (including grass clippings, leaves, and chipped brush) and food waste (including discarded fruits, vegetables, and grains) is an allowed accessory use in residential zoning districts, subject to the regulations of this section. 
(b)	Only landscape waste generated from plants grown and maintained on the subject lot may be composted. This provision is not intended to prohibit property owners from adding "outside" materials or ingredients to speed or enhance decomposition. 
(c)	Only food waste resulting from food preparation or consumption by residents of the subject lot and their visitors may be composted. This provision is not intended to prohibit property owners from adding "outside" materials or ingredients to speed or enhance decomposition. Meat products are prohibited in residential compost bins. 
(d)	All food waste shall be placed within rodent-resistant compost bins, which are prohibited in front and rear yards and shall be set back at least ten feet from all lot lines. 
(e)	Landscape waste compost piles may not exceed 125 cubic feet in volume, and may not exceed five feet in height. 
(f)	Landscape waste compost piles shall be set back at least ten feet from all lot lines. Landscape waste compost piles that are not contained within a rodent-resistant compost bin shall be set back at least 30 feet from all dwelling units on abutting lots. 
(g)	Only animal waste from herbivores is allowed within compost piles or bins. 
(h)	Burning of compost piles is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.192), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-703. Satellite dish antennas.
(a)	Applicability. Satellite dish antennas are subject to compliance with the regulations of this section. 
(b)	Location.
(1)	In RS, RSA and R3 districts, satellite dish antennas shall be located in the rear yard or on the rear of the principal building. If usable communication signals cannot be obtained from the rear location, the satellite dish antenna may be located in the side yard or on the side of the principal building. If usable satellite television communication signals cannot be received by locating the antenna to the rear or side of the principal building, the antenna may be placed in the front yard or on the front-facing roof of the principal building, provided that (a) the dish diameter does not exceed 18 inches and (b) the community development department director's approval is obtained prior to such installation. The community development department director is authorized to approve a front yard location only upon a showing by the applicant that usable communication signals are not receivable from any location on the property other than the location selected by the applicant. 
(2)	In all districts other than RS, RSA and R3 districts, satellite dish antennas may be located anywhere upon a building or within the buildable area of the lot, subject to applicable zoning district setback regulations. 
(c)	Other regulations.
(1)	In all RS, RSA and R3 districts, satellite dish antennas may not exceed 36 inches in diameter. 
(2)	A ground-mounted satellite dish antenna may not exceed 20 feet in height including any platform or structure upon which the antenna is mounted or affixed. 
(3)	Roof-mounted satellite dish antenna may not exceed the height of the elevation of the ridge line of the principal structure. 
(4)	If usable satellite signals cannot be obtained from an antenna installed in compliance with the height limitations imposed by this section, such satellite dish antennas may be installed at a greater height, provided that the height is approved by the community development department director. The community development department director is authorized to approve a greater height upon a showing by the applicant that installation at a height greater is necessary for the reception of usable communication signals. 
(5)	All satellite dish antennas shall comply with all manufacturers' specifications, be located on non-combustible and corrosion-resistant material, and be erected in a secure, wind-resistant manner. 
(6)	All satellite dish antennas shall be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning pursuant to the requirements of the city electrical code. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.193), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-704. Solar energy systems.
(a)	General.
(1)	Accessory solar energy systems shall comply with all applicable building ordinance and electrical code requirements. 
(2)	Owners of accessory solar energy systems are solely responsible for negotiating with other property owners for any desired solar easements to protect access to sunlight. Any such easements shall be recorded with the county recorder of deeds. 
(b)	Building-mounted solar energy systems.
(1)	Building-mounted solar energy systems may be mounted on principal and accessory structures. 
(2)	All applicable setback regulations apply to building-mounted solar energy systems. 
(3)	Only building-integrated and/or flush-mounted solar energy system may be installed on street-facing building elevations. 
(4)	Solar energy systems may not extend more than three feet above the applicable maximum building height limit or more than four feet above the highest point of the roof line, whichever is less. 
(c)	Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
(1)	In residential zoning districts, ground-mounted solar energy systems may not be located in a required street setback or street yard. 
(2)	Ground-mounted solar energy systems may be located within required interior side and rear setbacks. 
(3)	Ground-mounted solar energy systems are subject to applicable accessory structure height and impervious coverage regulations. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.194), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, 12-19-2023)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, adopted December 19, 2023, repealed the former § 27-704, and renumbered former §§ 27-705, 27-506 as §§ 27-704, and 27-705, as herein set out. The former § 27-704 pertained to secondary suites and derived from Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.194), 11-27-2018. 
Sec. 27-705. Swimming pools.
(a)	Swimming pools are considered accessory structures, with setbacks measured from the decking or other part of the pool structure nearest the applicable lot line. 
(b)	Accessory swimming pools may be approved only after receipt of written approval from the board of health. 
(c)	Pool heaters and pumps shall be located so that they are at least ten feet from any property line. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.196), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-201; Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, 12-19-2023)
(Formerly § 27-706) 
Secs. 27-706—27-716. Reserved.
DIVISION 12. TEMPORARY USES
Sec. 27-717. Temporary buildings.
(a)	Unless otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance, temporary buildings are prohibited in all zoning districts. 
(b)	Temporary buildings may be used in conjunction with ongoing construction work during the time that a valid permit is in place for such construction. Such temporary buildings require approval from the community development director and shall be removed when the construction has been completed. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.197), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-718. Portable storage containers.
Portable storage containers may be parked or stored on any lot when used in conjunction with a valid, unexpired permit. When not associated with a valid permit, portable storage containers may not be parked or stored in an R zoning district for more than 15 consecutive days or a total of more than 30 days during any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.198), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-719. Temporary outdoor sales of merchandise.
Temporary outdoor sales of merchandise may be authorized in any X, C or M district upon approval of an administrative permit by the community development director pursuant to article X, division 9 of this chapter. Such temporary sales activities are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Any applicant for a permit for temporary outdoor sales of merchandise shall provide written authorization from the subject property owner to use the property for temporary outdoor sales of merchandise. 
(2)	No such temporary outdoor sales of merchandise may be conducted on public property, within any public right-of-way, and no display or sales area may be located within 50 feet of the street. 
(3)	No temporary outdoor sales of merchandise may be approved for a time period exceeding three consecutive days. 
(4)	No administrative permit for temporary outdoor sales of merchandise may be approved for the same lot for a total of more than six days in any calendar year. 
(5)	Except as authorized by the administrative permit for temporary outdoor sales of merchandise, all other sales of merchandise shall be conducted within a permanent building that has a floor area of at least 300 square feet and that complies with the requirements of this zoning ordinance, chapter 7, and all other applicable provisions of the municipal code. 
(6)	No temporary buildings or tents may be permitted in connection with the temporary outdoor sales of merchandise. 
(7)	All displays and equipment shall be removed nightly. 
(8)	No operator, employee or representative may solicit directly to the motoring public. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.199), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-720. Temporary outdoor sales of seasonal goods.
Temporary outdoor sales of seasonal goods, such as sale of plants, flowers, farm produce, Christmas trees, and pumpkins may be authorized in X, NS, C or M district upon approval of an administrative permit by the community development director pursuant to article X, division 9 of this chapter. Such temporary seasonal sales activities are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Any applicant for a permit for temporary outdoor sales of seasonal goods shall provide written authorization from the subject property owner to use the property for temporary outdoor sales of seasonal goods. 
(2)	No temporary outdoor sales of seasonal goods may be conducted on public property or within any public right-of-way. 
(3)	No temporary outdoor sales of seasonal goods may be approved for a time period exceeding 45 consecutive days. 
(4)	No administrative permit for temporary outdoor sales of seasonal goods may be approved for the same lot for a total of more than 90 days in any calendar year. 
(5)	Temporary outdoor sales of seasonal goods may be permitted only on lots that have adjacent to them hard surface parking with a curb cut. 
(6)	No operator, employee or representative may solicit directly to the motoring public. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.200), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-721. Temporary outdoor events.
(a)	Temporary outdoor social, entertainment, recreation or other events of general public interest may be authorized upon approval of an administrative permit by the community development director pursuant to article X, division 9 of this chapter. Decisions to grant or deny an administrative permit for a temporary outdoor event shall be based on consideration of at least the following factors: 
(1)	The duration, hours of operation and activity levels proposed as part of the event; 
(2)	Whether the proposed location is of adequate size to accommodate the proposed event considering any other activities programmed for or that regularly occur on the subject site; 
(3)	Whether provisions have been made for safe and adequate parking and transportation access for the event; and 
(4)	Whether adequate waste disposal, recycling and public sanitation facilities will be provided for the event. 
(b)	All temporary outdoor events are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	No temporary event may be approved for a time period exceeding 14 consecutive days. 
(2)	No temporary event may be approved for the same lot for a total of more than 14 days in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.201), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-722. Donation boxes.
Donation boxes, as well as the property owners and occupants on whose property a donation box is located and the sponsoring organizations and charitable organizations receiving the benefit of donated items, shall adhere to the following regulations: 
(a)	When a donation box is visible from street rights-of-way or from R-zoned properties, the donation box shall be screened as follows: 
(1)	Minimum screening shall consist of an opaque fence six feet in height; and 
(2)	The screening fence may be painted by an artist as a decorative fence, subject to review and approval by the Brookhaven Arts and Culture Commission. 
(b)	Donation boxes shall not impede walkways, sidewalks, or driveways. 
(c)	Donation boxes are limited to two per property. The donation box or the screening fence shall be clearly marked with the name, telephone number, and email address of the sponsoring organization or charitable organization receiving the benefit of the donated items. 
(d)	All donated items must be collected and stored in the donation box itself. Donated items and materials shall not be placed or left outside of donation boxes. The area surrounding each donation box shall be maintained and shall be kept free of liter and debris by the property owner or occupant on whose property the donation box is located. 
(e)	Sponsoring organizations and charitable organizations receiving the benefit of the donated items shall adhere to the following minimum regulations: 
(1)	Emptying of donation boxes and retrieval of the donated items must occur at least one time per week; and 
(2)	Donation boxes must be enclosed and sealed on all sides and must be covered with a lid that closes. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-07, § I, 6-28-2023)
Secs. 27-723—27-731. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. PARKING AND ACCESS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 27-732. Purpose.
(a)	The parking regulations of this article are intended to help ensure that off-street parking facilities are provided to meet the basic day-to-day needs of shoppers, employees, visitors and residents while also avoiding the negative impacts that can result from requiring excessive quantities of off-street parking. 
(b)	The provisions of this article are also intended to help protect the public health, safety and general welfare by: 
(1)	Promoting economically viable and beneficial use of land; and 
(2)	Providing flexible methods of responding to the transportation and access demands of various land uses in different areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.202), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-733. Applicability.
(a)	General. Off-street parking shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the regulations apply to all zoning districts and uses. 
(b)	New uses and development. The parking regulations of this article apply to all new buildings constructed and all new uses established in all zoning districts. 
(c)	Change of use. If a new use of a building or structure requires more off-street parking than the use that most recently occupied the building or structure, the new use shall comply with the parking requirements of this article. 
(d)	Enlargements and expansions. The parking regulations of this article apply whenever an existing building or use is enlarged or expanded to include additional dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement used in establishing off-street parking requirements. Additional spaces are required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use. There is no requirement to address parking deficits associated with existing, lawfully established buildings or uses. 
(e)	Maintenance. Off-street parking spaces required by this zoning ordinance shall be maintained for the life of the principal use. Off-street parking spaces and parking lots shall be maintained in good repair including, but not limited to, repair of pot holes, maintenance of striping, signage, etc. 
(f)	Damage or destruction. When a use that has been damaged or destroyed is re-established, off-street parking or loading facilities shall also be re-established or continued in operation in an amount equal to the number maintained at the time of such damage or destruction. It is not necessary, however, to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.203), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-11-03, § I(Attch.), 11-26-2019)
Secs. 27-734—27-743. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING RATIOS
Sec. 27-744. Minimum requirements.
Unless otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance, off-street motor vehicle parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the minimum ratios established table 8-1. 


Table 8-1 Notes  [1] 1.5 space per DU for 2-bedroom unit and 2 spaces per unit for 3-bedroom or larger unit.  [2] Unless otherwise required at time of SLUP approval.  [3] Minimum requirement for assembly areas without fixed seating = 20 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area.  [4] No parking required for first 1,500 sq. ft. of floor area.  [5] Plus motor vehicle and bicycle spaces required for any retail sales floor area.  [6] Plus 2.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of sales or office space. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.204), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2024-02-01, § I, 2-27-2024)
Secs. 27-745—27-755. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. CALCULATION OF REQUIRED PARKING
Sec. 27-756. Floor area.
Parking requirements based on floor area shall be calculated on the basis of gross floor area, minus parking and loading areas and areas of a building occupied exclusively by mechanical equipment, utilities and service areas that are not intended for human occupancy (e.g., dumpsters and recycling bins). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.206), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-757. Multiple uses.
Lots containing more than one use or tenant shall provide parking in an amount equal to the total aggregate number of spaces required for each use or tenant on the lot except when a shared parking arrangement is approved in accordance with section 27-778. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.207), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-758. Calculations.
In calculating the number of parking spaces required for uses subject to a minimum parking ratio of "x" spaces per 1,000 square feet (KSF), first divide the floor area of the subject use by 1,000 and then multiply the result by "x." If, for example, a minimum parking ratio of 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet is applied to a use occupying 1,500 square feet of floor area, the minimum parking requirement for that use is calculated as follows: (1.500 sq. ft. ÷ 1,000) × 2.5 = 1.5 × 2.5 = 3.75, which is rounded up to four spaces. See also the fraction and rounding rules of section 27-1329. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.208), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-759. Occupancy-based standards.
For the purpose of computing parking requirements based on staff, students, members, residents or occupants, calculations shall be based on the average number of persons working on any single shift, the average enrollment or membership or the area's code-rated capacity, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.209), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-760. Bench seating.
For the purpose of calculating parking requirements based on seating, the building code governs. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.210), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-761. Unlisted uses.
Upon receiving a development or permit application for a use not specifically listed, the community development director is authorized to apply the off-street parking ratio specified for the listed use that the director deems most similar to the proposed use or establish a parking requirement for the proposed use in accordance with section 27-762. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.211), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-762. Establishment of other ratios.
(a)	The community development director is authorized to establish required minimum parking ratios for unlisted uses and in those instances where authority to establish the parking requirement is expressly provided. 
(b)	Such ratios shall be established on the basis of (1) a similar use/parking determination (as described in section 27-761), (2) on parking data provided by the applicant or (3) other information available to the community development director. 
(c)	Parking data and studies provided by applicants shall include estimates of parking demand based on reliable data collected from comparable local uses or on external data from credible research organizations, such as the Urban Land Institute (ULI) and the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity and location. Such parking studies shall document the source of all data used to develop proposed requirements. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.212), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-763—27-772. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PARKING CREDITS AND REDUCTIONS
Sec. 27-773. PR-1 district.
No minimum motor vehicle parking requirements apply in the PR-1 district. Bicycle parking requirements do apply. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.213), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-774. On-street parking
Nonresidential uses may count on-street parking spaces on public street rights-of-way abutting the subject property towards satisfying off-street motor vehicle parking requirements. One off-street parking space credit may be taken for each 25 linear feet of abutting right-of-way where on-street parking is allowed. Only space on the same side of the street as the subject use may be counted. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.214), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-775. Car-share and bike-share service.
The following parking credits apply to nonresidential uses that are required to provide ten or more motor vehicle parking spaces and to residential projects that are required to provide 25 or more motor vehicle parking spaces. 
(1)	The number of required motor vehicle parking spaces is reduced by four spaces for each parking space that is leased by a city-approved car-share program for use by a car-share vehicle. 
(2)	The number of required motor vehicle parking spaces is reduced by two spaces for uses that provide space for a city-approved bike-share program facility with a minimum of eight bicycle parking docks. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.215), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-776. Electric vehicle charging stations.
In parking garages and parking lots containing more than ten parking spaces, each parking space equipped with public electric vehicle charging equipment is credited as two motor vehicle parking spaces for purposes of satisfying the minimum off-street parking ratios of table 8-1. Said credit shall be limited to a maximum of ten percent of the required parking. To receive credit, each electric vehicle charging station-equipped parking space shall be publicly accessible and be identified by signs. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.216), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-07-02, § I(Attch.), 7-23-2019)
Sec. 27-777. Motorcycle and scooter parking.
In parking lots containing more than ten parking spaces, the provision of motorcycle or scooter parking spaces may be credited toward satisfying the minimum off-street parking ratios of table 8-1 at the rate of one motor vehicle parking space for each two motorcycle or scooter parking spaces. The maximum credit allowed under this provision is two spaces or ten percent of the total minimum motor vehicle parking requirement for the subject property, whichever is greater. To receive credit, each motorcycle and scooter space shall have a concrete surface and minimum dimensions of four feet by eight feet. Areas restricted to motorcycle and scooter parking shall be identified by signs. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.217), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-778. Shared parking.
(a)	General. Shared parking refers to the practice of two or more users who need parking at different times to agree to make use of the same motor vehicle parking spaces. Shared parking is encouraged as a means of conserving scarce land resources, reducing stormwater runoff, reducing the heat island effect caused by large paved areas and improving community appearance. 
(b)	Eligibility. Shared parking facilities are allowed for mixed-use projects and for multiple uses with different times of peak parking demand, subject to approval by the community development director. 
(c)	Submittal requirements and methodology.
(1)	Applicants proposing to use shared parking as a means of reducing overall motor vehicle parking requirements shall submit: 
a.	The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or tenants that are sharing the parking; 
b.	The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared; 
c.	A shared parking analysis; 
d.	A legal instrument such as an easement or deed restriction guaranteeing access to the parking for the shared parking users. 
(1)	The required shared parking analysis shall be based on the latest edition of the Urban Land Institute (ULI) shared parking model or be prepared by an engineer who is registered in the State of Georgia and who has expertise in parking and transportation. 
(2)	The shared parking analysis shall demonstrate that the peak parking demands of the subject uses occur at different times and that the parking area will be large enough for the anticipated demands of both uses. 
(d)	Location. Shared parking may be located on-site or off-site. Off-site parking is subject to the regulations of section 27-819. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.218), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-779—27-788. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. BICYCLE PARKING
Sec. 27-789. Minimum parking ratios.
Short-term and long-term bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the minimum ratios established in table 8-1. Uses for which no bicycle parking ratio is established in table 8-1 are not required to provide off-street bicycle parking. No residential or nonresidential use is required to provide more than 30 short-term bicycle parking spaces, 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.219), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-790. Floor area used for bike parking.
Areas within a building that are used to provide bicycle parking that complies with the bicycle parking design and location requirements of this section are not counted as floor area for the purpose of calculating motor vehicle parking requirements or Floor Area Ratio (FAR). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.220), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2023-01-05, 1-24-2023)
Sec. 27-791. Design and location.
(a)	General. All bicycle parking spaces are subject to the general design and location requirements of this section (section 27-791). 
(1)	Bicycle parking spaces shall be illuminated if accessible to users after dark. 
(2)	Bicycle parking spaces shall be located to be readily visible by the public or by building users, except in the case of long-term parking spaces located in secure areas accessible only to employees, staff or residents; 
(3)	Bicycle parking spaces shall be accessible without climbing stairs, going up or down a slope of more than 12 percent, and via a route on the property that is designed to minimize conflicts with motor vehicles and pedestrians. 
(4)	All bike racks shall be located at least two feet in all directions from any obstruction, including other bike racks, walls, doors, posts, or columns. 
(5)	All bicycle rack areas on or adjacent to sidewalks, plazas, or other areas in the public realm must include a detectable device for visually impaired pedestrians to detect as an obstacle. 
(6)	Nonresidential uses may use up to one required automobile parking space as space for providing bicycle parking. 
(7)	All developments providing showering and changing facilities to employees, residents, and other regular building occupants may reduce their required motor vehicle parking requirements by up to ten percent. 
(8)	To provide bicycle parking spaces that do not require the lifting of a bicycle, a minimum of 30 percent of required spaces must be in a horizontal rack or on the lower level of a stacked rack with a minimum of one horizontal bicycle parking space. 
(9)	All required bicycle parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of two feet in width by six feet in length, with a minimum overhead vertical clearance of seven feet. Bicycle racks must be chosen from the most current version of the Association of Pedestrian and Bicycle Professionals' Bicycle Parking Guidelines list of recommended bicycle racks, except as otherwise required. 
(10)	Extra-wide bicycle spaces to accommodate a variety of bicycles and accessories (i.e. recumbent bikes, cargo bikes, children bikes, trailers, etc.) shall be provided in conformance with the table below. The table applies to short-term and long-term bicycle parking individually. For example, if five short term spaces and one long-term space are required, at least one out of the five short-term spaces must be extra-wide and the one long-term space must be extra-wide. 


a.	All extra-wide bicycle spaces must be a minimum of three feet by ten feet and provided in a horizontal rack on the ground. If the bicycle space is enclosed, a minimum height of five feet shall be required. 
b.	Unenclosed accessible bike spaces shall provide an additional 36 inches of in-line clearance. 
c.	Extra-wide bicycle spaces shall be posted with signage indicating that the space is reserved for accessible extra-wide bicycles only. 
(11)	Electric assist bicycle recharging stations must be provided in conformance with the table below. The table applies to short-term and long-term bicycle parking individually, i.e., If five short term spaces and one long-term space are required, at least one out of the five short term spaces must have recharging station and the one long-term space must have a recharging station. 


a.	All electric assist bicycle recharging spaces must be a minimum of three feet by ten feet. If bicycle space is enclosed, a minimum height of five feet shall be required. 
b.	All provided electrical assist bicycle recharging stations shall allow for bicycle to be locked to a rack. 
c.	At least one of the required recharging stations must be accessible to the horizontal biking space. 
d.	Public electric bicycle charging stations shall be posted with signage indicating that the space is reserved for electric bicycle charging purposes only. For purposes of this provision, "charging" means that an electric bicycle is parked at an electric bicycle charging station and is connected to the battery charging station equipment. 
e.	Electric bicycle charging stations shall be maintained in all respects, including the functioning of the equipment. A phone number or other contact information shall be provided on the equipment for reporting when it is not functioning or other problems are encountered. 
(b)	Long-term bicycle parking. In addition to the general bicycle parking design and location requirements of section 27-791, all required long-term bicycle parking shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Long-term bicycle parking spaces may not be in dwelling units or on dwelling unit balconies. 
(2)	Unless clearly visible from the main building entrance, a sign indicating the location of all long-term bicycle parking spaces shall be prominently displayed near the main entrance to the building or facility, and additional signs shall be provided as necessary to ensure easy way-finding. A "bicycle parking" sign shall also be displayed on or adjacent to any indoor room or area designated for bicycle parking. 
(3)	Long-term bicycle parking spaces shall protect the entire bicycle, its components and accessories against theft and inclement weather, including wind-driven rain and snow. Acceptable forms of protection include 
a.	Individual bicycle lockers; 
b.	Attended parking areas; 
c.	Video-monitored parking areas; 
d.	Restricted-access parking areas; or 
e.	Other comparable arrangements approved by the community development director. 
(4)	Except in the case of bicycle lockers with a separate access door for each bike or attended facilities, all long-term bicycle parking spaces shall be designed to allow bicycles to be securely locked to a bicycle rack. 
(c)	Short-term bicycle parking. In addition to the general bicycle parking design and location requirements of section 27-791, all required short-term bicycle parking shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Short-term bicycle parking shall be visible from the main public building entrance and be at least as conveniently located as the most convenient non disabled ADA motor vehicle parking space serving the subject use. If no motor vehicle parking is provided, short-term bicycle parking spaces shall be located within 50 feet of a building entrance. 
(2)	Short-term bicycle parking spaces shall be located on private property unless the community development director approves a location within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.221), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2023-01-05, 1-24-2023)
Secs. 27-792—27-801. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION
Sec. 27-802. Applicability.
An on-site circulation system for pedestrian and non-motorized travel shall be provided in accordance with the regulations of this division. Lots occupied by fewer than four residential dwelling units are not subject to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.222), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-803. Connection to the street.
The on-site pedestrian circulation system shall connect all adjacent public rights-of-way to the main building entrance. The connection shall follow a direct route and not involve significant out-of-direction travel for system users. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.223), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-804. Reserved.
Sec. 27-805. Internal connections.
The on-site pedestrian circulation system shall connect all buildings on the site and provide connections to other areas of the site likely to be used by pedestrians and non-motorized travel, such as parking areas, bicycle parking, open space and recreation areas and similar amenity features. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.225), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-806. Design.
Required on-site pedestrian circulation facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the regulations of this section. 
(1)	The on-site pedestrian circulation system shall be paved and be at least five feet in width. 
(2)	When the on-site pedestrian circulation system crosses drive aisles, it shall be clearly differentiated through the use of elevation changes, different paving material or other equally effective methods of safely accommodating non-motorized travel, as approved by the community development director. Striping alone does not meet this requirement. 
(3)	When the on-site pedestrian circulation system is parallel and adjacent to a motor vehicle travel lane, it shall be a raised path at least eight inches above the vehicle travel lane surface or be separated from the vehicle travel lane by a raised curb, bollards, landscaping or another physical barrier. If a raised path is used, the ends of the raised portions shall be equipped with accessible curb ramps. 
(4)	The on-site pedestrian circulation system shall be illuminated to ensure that it can be used safely at night by employees, residents, and customers. Lighting shall be at height appropriate to a pedestrian pathway system. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.226, 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-807—27-816. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. LOCATION AND USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING
Sec. 27-817. General.
Except as otherwise expressly stated in this article, required off-street parking areas shall be located on the same lot as the use they are required to serve. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.227), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-818. Parking in setbacks and yards.
(a)	Parking is prohibited in front setbacks in RM and O&I districts. 
(b)	Parking is prohibited in front yards of RS and R3 districts, except on a driveway, or in a roofed carport or enclosed garage. No more than 35 percent of the total area between the street right-of-way line and the front of the principal building may be paved in any RS or R3 district. 
(c)	Circular driveways are permitted only on lots with adequate width to ensure that driveway approaches on the subject lot are spaced at least 20 feet apart and that all parts of the driveway are set back at least five feet from side property lines. Circular driveway where permitted, are subject to the driveway coverage limits of this section. 
(d)	Ribbon driveways that consist of two wheel tracks with turf or ground cover plantings in the median between wheel tracks are allowed to serve detached houses, attached houses and two-flats. Each wheel track of a ribbon driveway shall be surfaced in compliance with the requirements of this article and be at least two and one-half feet in width. The median area between each wheel track is not counted as impervious area if its is planted and maintained with turf or other ground cover planted within pervious soils. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.228), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-819. Off-site parking.
(a)	When allowed. The community development director is authorized to allow all or a portion of required off-street parking to be provided off-site, in accordance with the regulations of this section. Required accessible parking spaces (see article VIII, division 10) may not be located off site. 
(b)	Location. Off-site parking areas shall be located within a 1,000-foot radius of the use served by such parking, measured between the nearest public entrance door of the use to be served and the outer perimeter of the furthest parking space within the off-site parking lot. The community development director is authorized approve the location of off-site parking areas beyond 1,000 feet from the use served in accordance with the administrative variance procedures of article X, division 8 of this chapter. 
(c)	Required zoning. Off-site parking lots are allowed only: 
(1)	In zoning districts that permit non-accessory parking; 
(2)	In districts that allow the principal use to be served by the off-site parking spaces; or 
(3)	When approved in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article X, division 3 of this chapter. 
(d)	Design.
(1)	Off-site parking areas shall comply with applicable layout and design regulations of article VIII, division 8. 
(2)	Wheel stops shall be provided in parking spaces located adjacent to pedestrian zones. 
(e)	Control of off-site parking area. The property to be occupied by off-site parking spaces shall be under the same ownership as the lot containing the use to be served by the parking. The off-site parking area may be under separate ownership only if a legal instrument such as an easement or deed restriction guaranteeing access to the parking for the shared parking users is provided. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.229), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-820. Use of off-street parking.
(a)	Required off-street parking spaces are intended to serve residents, tenants, patrons, employees, or guests of the principal use. Required off-street parking areas may be used solely for the temporary parking of licensed motor vehicles in operating condition. 
(b)	Required off-street parking spaces may not be used for the storage, display or sale of goods equipment or materials. No motor vehicle repair work of any kind is permitted in a required parking space. 
(c)	Required spaces may be used for electric vehicle charging. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.230), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-821—27-830. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. PARKING LAYOUT AND DESIGN
Sec. 27-831. Applicability.
The parking layout and design regulations of this section apply to all off-street parking lots, whether containing required parking spaces or non-required parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.231), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-832. Chapter 14 requirements.
Each parking space and parking lot, including all internal circulation driveways, shall comply with the requirements of chapter 14, except as otherwise expressly stated. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.232), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-833. Access drives.
(a)	All off-street parking lots shall have access to a public or private street and be served by a paved access drive. 
(b)	All access drive gates shall be set back at least 20 feet from the back of the street curb or ten feet from the right-of-way, which results in a greater setback. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.233), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-834. Parking stall size.
(a)	Compact spaces. In parking lots containing 20 or more parking spaces up to 40 percent of the spaces may be designated and designed as compact parking spaces. Compact parking spaces shall be at least eight feet in width and 15 feet in depth. 
(b)	Standard spaces. All standard (non-compact) parking spaces shall be at least eight and one-half feet in width and 18 feet in depth. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.234), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-835. Parking lot geometrics.
Parking lots shall comply with the geometric design standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.235), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-836. Tandem and valet parking.
Parking areas shall be designed and constructed to allow unobstructed movement into and out of required parking spaces without interfering with fixed objects or vehicles except in the case of allowed tandem and valet parking, as follows. 
(1)	Tandem parking. Tandem parking spaces may be used to satisfy parking requirements for household living (residential) uses if the tandem spaces are assigned to the same dwelling unit. 
(2)	Stacked parking. Stacked parking (i.e., requiring one or more vehicles to be moved to obtain access to other parked vehicles) may be used to satisfy minimum off-street parking requirements for nonresidential uses if an attendant is present and able to move and provide access to parked vehicles during all hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.236), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-837. Marking.
In parking areas with more than four parking spaces, the location of each parking space shall be identified by surface markings or other effective means and be maintained so as to be readily visible at all times. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.237), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-838. Surfacing.
All off-street parking areas and access drives shall be surfaced and maintained with an asphaltic or Portland cement binder concrete or other dustless, all-weather surface approved by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.238), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-839. Vertical clearance.
All required parking spaces shall have overhead vertical clearance of at least seven feet. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.239), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-840. Lighting.
(a)	All lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall use full-cutoff directional lighting to prevent glare and light spillover onto streets and abutting R-zoned lots. 
(b)	The maximum luminance at the property line of an abutting R-zoned lot may not exceed 0.5 footcandles at grade (horizontal) or at five feet above grade (vertical). 
(c)	Light standards within parking lots and atop parking garages may not exceed 20 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.240), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-841. Landscaping
See article IX, division 1 of this chapter for landscape regulations. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.241), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-842. Parking garages.
The following supplemental requirements apply to parking garages: 
(1)	Vehicular access. 
a.	Vehicular access shall be designed in a manner that minimizes disruption to motorized travel, non-motorized travel and the streetscape. 
b.	Vehicular ingress and egress shall be provided from an alley or side (secondary) street. When alley access or side-street access is not possible, then vehicular ingress and egress shall be permitted from the front (primary) street. 
c.	Free-flow parking garage entries (i.e., without attendants, gates or ticket-dispensing machines) shall provide at least one off-street vehicle stacking space per entry lane. 
d.	Parking garage entries that include automatic ticket-dispensing machines or automatic key readers at entries shall provide at least two off-street vehicle stacking spaces per entry lane. 
e.	Parking garage entries that include manual ticket-dispensing machines at entries shall provide at least three off-street vehicle stacking spaces per entry lane. 
f.	Required vehicle stacking spaces at entries shall be located so that they do obstruct sidewalks. 
(2)	Design. 
a.	Ramps and sloping floors shall be located so as not to be visible from the front-street facing side of the parking garage. 
b.	In order to de-emphasize the horizontal nature of the parking garage, vertical divisions at least two feet in width and extending the full height of the parking garage structure are required at least every 30 feet (measured horizontally). 
c.	Parking structures shall be architecturally compatible with principal buildings on the site, and the building materials used on accessory parking garages shall match or be similar to the building materials used on the principal building. 
d.	Parking garages adjacent to the street shall either be lined with habitable/occupiable floor space or incorporate ornamental grillwork, artwork, or similar architectural features. 
(3)	Lighting. 
a.	Parking garages are subject the lighting regulations of section 27-840. 
b.	Lighting on top of parking garages is prohibited between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except that lighting is allowed while the parking facility is open to the public. 
c.	Parking garages shall be designed to screen interior garage lights from view of abutting R-zoned lots. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.242), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-843—27-852. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. STACKING SPACES
Sec. 27-853. Spaces required.
In addition to the parking required for each use, establishments with drive-through facilities shall provide stacking spaces for each drive-through station as indicated in table 8-2. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.243), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-854. Dimensions.
Each lane of stacking spaces shall be at least nine feet in width and at least 18 feet in length. Stacking lanes shall be delineated with pavement markings. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.244), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-855. Bypass lane.
Drive-through restaurants shall include a bypass lane adjacent to the required stacking lane. The bypass lane shall have minimum width of ten feet and be designed to allow vehicles to circumvent or leave the stacking lane without waiting for other queuing vehicles to exit. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.245), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-856. Location and design.
Stacking lanes shall be located on the subject property. They may not be located within required driveways or drive aisles, parking spaces or loading areas and may not interfere with access to parking and ingress and egress from the street. Stacking lanes and drive-through windows may not be located between the principal building and the front street unless approved in accordance with the special land use permit procedures of article X, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.246), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-857. Pedestrian access.
The principal pedestrian access to the entrance of the use from a public sidewalk may not cross the drive-through facility stacking lane. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.247), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-858. Noise.
Speakers associated with drive-through facilities shall not be audible from abutting R-zoned lots. Sound attenuation walls, landscaping or other mitigation measures may be required to ensure that the facility will not have adverse noise-related impacts on nearby residential uses. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.248), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-859. Drive-through and drive-in uses.
Drive-through and drive in uses are allowed only as indicated in table 7-1. See also section 27-685. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.249), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-860—27-879. Reserved.
DIVISION 10. ACCESSIBLE PARKING
Secs. 27-880—27-899. Reserved.
DIVISION 11. RECREATIONAL AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Sec. 27-900. Commercial motor vehicles.
The parking of commercial motor vehicles (as defined in O.C.G.A § 40-1-1) is prohibited on R-zoned lots. This prohibition does not apply to: 
(1)	Law enforcement vehicles; 
(2)	Vehicles actively engaged in construction, or contractor services on the subject property; 
(3)	Vehicles within a completely enclosed building; 
(4)	The temporary parking (12 hours or less) of vehicles for the purpose of loading/unloading; or 
(5)	When the subject lot is occupied by an allowed nonresidential use. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.250), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-901. Recreational vehicles.
(a)	The parking and storage of trailers and recreational vehicles is prohibited outside of an enclosed building in the following areas on R-zoned lots: 
(1)	The front or street side yard; 
(2)	Within ten feet of an interior side lot line; or 
(3)	Within 20 feet of the rear lot line. 
(b)	Recreational vehicles and trailers may be parked, for the limited purpose of storage between travel, on unpaved surfaces including gravel or a similar material that prevents the vehicle's or trailer's tires from making direct contact with the earth, soil, sod or mud so long as the unpaved surface prevents tracking of earth, soil, sod or mud onto public streets when the vehicle or trailer is moved from the property. 
(c)	Recreational vehicles may not be occupied for human habitation for more than 14 consecutive days while parked in a R zoning district. 
(d)	Recreational vehicles and trailers may not be parked on an R-zoned lot that does not contain a permanent dwelling unit or other structure intended for permanent human habitation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.251), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-902—27-911. Reserved.
DIVISION 12. LOADING
Sec. 27-912. General.
All uses that regularly receive materials or merchandise carried by delivery vehicles shall provide off-street loading facilities. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.252), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-913. Regulations.
(a)	Off-street loading areas shall be designed so that all vehicle maneuvering and loading/unloading operations will occur on private property and not interfere with or create safety hazards for motorized or non-motorized circulation. 
(b)	Unenclosed off street loading areas may not be located within 25 feet of any abutting R-zoned properties. 
(c)	Loading spaces are prohibited in the front yard area. 
(d)	All loading spaces shall be posted with "No Idling" signs. 
(e)	All loading areas and access drives shall be surfaced and maintained with an asphaltic or Portland cement binder concrete or other dustless, all-weather surface approved by the city engineer. 
(f)	See Division 9-1 for landscape and screening regulations. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.253), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-914—27-923. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. LANDSCAPING AND SITE FEATURES
DIVISION 1. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
Sec. 27-924. Purpose.
The landscaping and screening regulations of this division are intended to advance the general purposes of this zoning ordinance and to help: 
(1)	Maintain and enhance the city's appearance; 
(2)	Maintain and improve air quality; 
(3)	Protect surface water quality and reduce the negative impacts of stormwater run-off by reducing impervious surface area and providing vegetated areas that filter and retain greater amounts of stormwater on site; 
(4)	Moderate heat by providing shade; 
(5)	Encourage preservation and replacement of existing trees and landscaping; and 
(6)	Encourage low-impact development practices. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.254), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-925. Parking lot perimeter landscape.
(a)	The parking lot perimeter landscape regulations of this section are intended to help mitigate the visual and operational impacts of parking lots when such areas are adjacent to public streets or residential zoning districts. 
(b)	Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking lot perimeter landscape regulations of this section apply to the construction or expansion of any parking area except those on lots occupied by residential buildings containing fewer than four dwelling units. 
(c)	Parking lots subject to these regulations shall be screened from view of public streets using buildings, landscaping or a combination of buildings and landscaping. Landscaping provided to meet this requirement shall include comply with one of the following options: 
(1)	A landscape strip at least eight feet in width containing shrubs planted to provide a solid visual screen at least three feet in height at the end of the first growing season, with the remainder of the landscape strip covered with groundcover plants or annual or perennial vegetation; or 
(2)	A landscape strip at least four feet in width containing a solid masonry wall at least three feet in height, with the remainder of the landscape strip covered with groundcover plants, sod or annual or perennial vegetation. 
(d)	Overstory trees shall be provided within required parking lot perimeter landscape strips at the rate of one tree per 40 feet of parking lot frontage adjacent to a street or sidewalk. 
(e)	Parking lots shall be screened from view of abutting R-zoned lots using buildings or one of the following options: 
(1)	An opaque fence at least six feet in height and at least one tree per 25 linear feet of fence; 
(2)	A masonry wall with a minimum height of six feet; 
(3)	A row of evergreen shrubs shall be planted at [a] distance of 25 feet apart from center with a minimum height of four feet at the time of planting. Shrubs to be planted between the required overstory permieter trees and also at a five-foot spacing from all overstory trees. No invasive species as defined per section 14-50 may be used to meet any of the landscape requirements. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.255), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2022-12-03, § I, 12-13-2022)
Sec. 27-926. Interior parking lot landscape.
(a)	The interior parking lot landscaping regulations of this section are intended to help mitigate the visual and stormwater runoff impacts of parking lots and provide shade for parked vehicles and pedestrians. 
(b)	Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking lot interior landscape regulations of this section apply to the construction or expansion of any parking area containing more than 20 motor vehicle parking spaces. In the case of a parking lot expansion triggering compliance with these regulations, the minimum requirements for landscape area and plant material are calculated solely on the expanded area. 
(c)	Parking lots subject to these interior parking lot landscape regulations shall include at least 35 square feet of landscape area per motor vehicle parking space within the parking lot. When at least 50 percent of interior parking lot landscape area consists of depressed bioretention areas used for stormwater management, the minimum interior parking lot landscape requirement is reduced from 35 square feet per parking space to 25 square feet per parking space. To receive this bioretention credit, the ponding area shall be at least six inches and not more than 18 inches in depth and planted with native wildflowers/forbs, grasses, shrubs or other appropriate plant material. 
(d)	Plant material shall be provided within the interior of parking lots in accordance with table 9-1. 


(f)	Interior parking lot landscaping shall be reasonably distributed throughout the parking lot and provided in landscape islands or medians that comply with all of the following requirements: 
(1)	They shall be at least seven feet wide, as measured from the back of the curb; 
(2)	They shall include at least one shade tree per island and be covered with ground cover plants or mulch; 
(3)	They shall be protected by curbs or other barriers, which may include breaks or inlets to allow stormwater runoff to enter the landscape island; and 
(4)	They shall be located so that every parking space is within 50 feet of a tree. 
(5)	Parking rows that end abutting a paved driving surface shall have a landscape terminal island (end cap) at that end of the parking row. All other parking lot landscape islands shall be located to comply with all applicable regulations of this section. 
(g)	The community development director is expressly authorized to approve landscape plans that do not provide terminal islands at the end of each parking row or that otherwise provide for reduced dispersal of interior parking lot landscape areas when proposed landscape planting areas are combined to form functional bioretention areas or to preserve existing trees and vegetation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.256), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-927. Parking garages.
A landscape strip at least six feet in width shall be provided around the immediate perimeter of all parking garages, except along sides required to be lined by habitable floor space. Such required landscape strips shall contain at least one tree and ten shrubs per 50 linear feet, with the remainder of the landscape strip covered with groundcover plants, sod or annual or perennial vegetation (See also the parking garage design regulations of section 27-842). Shrubs must be planted/located a minimum of five feet away from overstory trees. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.257), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2022-12-03, § I, 12-13-2022)
Sec. 27-928. Outdoor storage and service area screening.
(a)	Refuse and recycling collection areas.
(1)	Refuse and recycling collection areas shall be located to minimize their visibility from public streets and R-zoned lots. 
(2)	Refuse and recycling receptacles (dumpsters) with a capacity of 1.5 cubic yards or more shall be screened with a masonry wall at least six feet and no more than eight feet in height on three sides. The service opening shall have a metal gate and be oriented away from public rights-of-way and R-zoned lots. 
(3)	Refuse and recycling collection enclosure gates may not open into or obstruct fire lanes. 
(4)	Refuse and recycling collection areas shall not be located in required landscape areas, required buffers, required parking areas, or required loading areas. 
(5)	Refuse and recycling collection areas shall not be located within ten feet of sensitive site features including, but not limited to, state waters stream, stream buffers, storm water management facilities, tree critical root zones, etc. 
(6)	Refuse and recycling collection areas shall not be designed and/or located in such a way as to encourage transfer or discharge of litter, debris, fats, greases, and oils into sensitive site features. 
(b)	Other storage and service areas.
(1)	All other outdoor storage areas, service areas and mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from streets and R-zoned lots with buildings, landscaping, masonry walls or decorative fences. 
(2)	Required decorative fences and masonry walls shall be brick, stone, wrought-iron or wood. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.258), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-11-09, § I, 11-24-2020)
Sec. 27-929. Plant and landscape material.
(a)	Deciduous trees used to satisfy the landscaping and screening regulations of this division shall have a minimum caliper size of 2.5 inches at time of planting. Evergreen trees shall have minimum height of six feet at time of planting. 
(b)	Shrubs used to satisfy the landscaping and screening regulations of this division shall have a minimum container size of three gallons. 
(c)	Ground cover plants or landscape material shall consist of shrubs, pine straw mulch, or other similar landscape material. 
(d)	Preserved trees will be credited toward satisfying the tree planting requirements of this zoning ordinance on the following basis: 
(1)	Preserved trees three inches or more in diameter at breast height (DBH) up to six inches DBH will be credited as three trees. 
(2)	Preserved trees larger than six inches DBH, up to 12 inches DBH will be credited as four trees; 
(3)	Preserved trees that are more than 12 inches DBH up to 24 inches DBH will be credited as five trees; and 
(4)	Preserved trees that are more than 24 inches DBH will be credited as ten trees. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.259), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-930. Maintenance.
(a)	Required landscaping and screening shall be continuously maintained, including necessary watering; weeding; pruning; pest control; litter and debris clean-up; and replacement of dead, diseased or damaged plant material. 
(b)	Failure to comply with an approved landscaping plan, including failure to maintain required landscaping and screening and failure to replace dead, dis-eased or damaged landscaping, constitutes a violation of this zoning ordinance and is subject to penalties and enforcement under article XI, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.260), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-931. Alternative compliance.
(a)	To accommodate creativity in landscape and screening design and to allow for flexibility in addressing atypical, site-specific development/redevelopment challenges, the community development director is authorized to approve alternative compliance landscape plans prepared by an landscape architect licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. In order to approve such alternative compliance landscape plans, the community development director shall determine that creative, alternative landscape plans will provide an equal or better means of meeting the intent of the landscaping and screening regulations of this division or that one or more of the following conditions or opportunities are present: 
(1)	The site has space limitations or an unusual shape that makes strict compliance with the regulations of this division impossible or impractical; 
(2)	Physical conditions on or adjacent to the site such as topography, soils, vegetation or existing structures or utilities are such that strict compliance is impossible, impractical or of no value in terms of advancing the general purposes of this division; or 
(3)	Safety considerations such as intersection visibility, utility locations, etc., make alternative compliance necessary. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.261), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-932—27-941. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. TRANSITION BUFFERS
Sec. 27-942. Applicability.
When a lot occupied by an attached house or multi-unit residential building abuts any RS-zoned lot, a transition buffer shall be provided on the subject lot to help ensure effective buffering and visual screening of the attached house or multi-unit residential development. These provisions do not apply in PR districts; PR districts include their own regulations governing neighborhood transitions (see section 27-478). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.262), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-943. Regulations.
(a)	Required transition buffers. 
(1)	Shall comply with the minimum buffer depth requirement established for the subject building type and be left undisturbed expect as expressly stated in this section; 
(2)	May not be paved or otherwise covered with impervious surfaces; and 
(3)	May not be used for parking, loading, storage, stormwater detention or any other use, except that the community development director is authorized to permit the placement of utilities within neighborhood transition buffer areas when the applicant shows that it is impractical to place such utilities outside required transition buffers. 
(b)	Trees and existing vegetation may not be removed from required transition buffer areas unless such trees are dead or diseased, as determined by the city arborist. The community development director is authorized to require the installation of new trees and plants when necessary to provide buffering and visual screening that is equivalent to that provided by the buffer before the dead or diseased trees were removed. 
(c)	The natural topography of the land within required transition buffer areas shall be preserved except that a slope easement may be cleared and graded when approved by the community development director to prevent soil erosion. Such easements may not cover more than 20 percent of the required transition buffer area and shall be immediately replanted upon completion of easement improvements. Such work shall be conducted to avoid disturbance of the soil within the dripline of trees within the transition buffer zone. 
(d)	The community development director is authorized to require the installation of new trees, and landscape screening material, including plants and fences, when determined to be necessary to provide an effective visual screen and sound buffer within transition buffer areas. 
(e)	Any grading or construction adjacent to the transition buffer shall be avoid disturbance of or encroachment upon the transition buffer. 
(f)	Access shall be provided as required for utilities and to ensure adequacy of fire protection services. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.263), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-944—27-952. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. FENCES AND WALLS
Sec. 27-953. Permit required.
Walls, fences, and retaining walls must be permitted by the community development department prior to installation. To receive a permit, the applicant must submit a complete application to the community development department. For walls and fences, upon receipt of a completed, compliant application, the community development department shall issue the applicant a permit on the day of receipt of the completed application at no cost to the property owner. For retaining walls, the applicable fee shall be that which is listed in the community development department fee schedule as adopted by the city council. Permits shall only be issued for walls, fences, and retaining walls that conform to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-954. Height.
(a)	Fences and masonry walls may not exceed four feet in height when located in the front yard or eight feet in height when located in any other (non-front) yard. Gates may be up to six feet in height in front yards. 
(b)	Gates providing vehicle access shall be set back at least ten feet from the right-of-way or 20 feet from back of curb, whichever results in a greater setback. 
(c)	Fences and masonry walls over three feet in height shall include a column or decorative element at least every eight linear feet (measured horizontally) to provide architectural variations and eliminate large expanses of blank area. 
(d)	Masonry wall and fence heights are measured from finished grade at the base of the fence or masonry wall to the highest point of the fence or wall. 
(e)	Fence and masonry wall columns, posts and ornaments are permitted to exceed maximum allowed fence and wall heights by up to two feet. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.264), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-955. Fence materials and design.
(a)	Chain link fences are prohibited in street yard areas of all lots. 
(b)	The finished side of all fences shall face the abutting property and public right-of-way. 
(c)	Fences on R-zoned lots may not include barbed wire, spikes, or similar devices, or an electric charge. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.265), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-956. Required fences and walls.
When this zoning ordinance or a condition of zoning approval requires a masonry wall or fence to be constructed, the wall or fence shall be in place before issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.266), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-957. Retaining walls.
(a)	Retaining walls on RS-zoned lots shall be set back from side property lines by a distance of at least 50 percent of the required side building setback. This retaining wall setback regulation does not apply to window wells. 
(1)	The board of appeals is authorized to grant a variance to this setback regulations. If the board determines that exceptional topographical restrictions exist on the lot in context with the adjoining property that were not created by the applicant or owner. 
(2)	In addition to the materials otherwise required to be submitted with a variance application, applicants for retaining wall setback variances shall submit a certified field run site plan or a topographical map certified by an engineer or landscape architect with the application for a variance. 
(b)	Retaining walls on RS-zoned lots may not exceed four feet in height. 
(1)	The community development director is authorized to grant an administrative variance allowing retaining walls of up to six feet in height in RS districts if the director determines that exceptional topographical restrictions exist on the lot in context with the adjoining property that were not created by the applicant or owner. 
(2)	The board of appeals is authorized to grant a variance allowing retaining walls of up to eight feet in height in RS districts if the board determines that exceptional topographical restrictions exist on the lot in context with the adjoining property that were not created by the applicant or owner. 
(3)	In addition to the materials otherwise required to be submitted with a variance application, the applicant for all retaining wall height variances shall submit a certified field run site plan or a topographical map certified by an engineer or landscape architect with the application for a variance. 
(c)	The maximum height of a retaining wall in zoning districts other that RS districts may not exceed the horizontal distance between the face of the retaining wall and the property line of a lot containing a residential use. 
(d)	Retaining walls may not be located within transition buffers. 
(e)	Lawfully established existing retaining walls that are nonconforming as to the standards of this section may be repaired and replaced as long as the repair or replacement does not result in an increase in the height of the retaining wall that is replaced and does not increase the footprint of the existing retaining wall by more than ten percent. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.267), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-958. Wing walls.
Wing walls may not exceed 12 feet in height or the height of the foundation wall to which it is attached, whichever results in a lower wing wall height. Wing walls shall not encroach into the required building setback. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.268), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-959. Intersection visibility.
Fences, masonry walls and other visual obstructions over three feet in height may not be placed or maintained on corner lots within the triangular formed by two lines that begin at the point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines and extend for a distance of 20 feet along each intersecting street right-of-way line and a third connecting line that forms the triangle (see figure 9-1). 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.269), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-960—27-979. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Sec. 27-980. Purposes.
The outdoor lighting regulations of this division are intended to help ensure adequate lighting for motorized and nonmotorized travelers; provide for the efficient use of energy; and reduce the impacts of nuisance lighting and glare on nearby areas. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.270), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-981. Applicability and exemptions.
The outdoor lighting regulations of subsections 27-982 and 27-983 apply to all outdoor lighting except for: 
(1)	Outdoor lighting on lots occupied by residential buildings containing fewer than four dwelling units; 
(2)	Public street lights; 
(3)	Airport runway and aviation safety lights required by the FAA (e.g., warning lights on radio, communication and navigation towers); 
(4)	Spotlighting of official government flags, provided that spotlighting is contained within the area of the flag; 
(5)	Outdoor lighting used exclusively for and during public recreational activities, sporting events at stadiums and ball fields or other outdoor public spaces or venues; 
(6)	Outdoor lighting used for emergency equipment and work conducted in the interest of law enforcement or for public health, safety or welfare; 
(7)	Outdoor lighting in association with special events approved by the city council; 
(8)	Lighting fixtures with a light output of no more than 1,000 lumens; and 
(9)	Temporary holiday light displays. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.271), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-11-03, § I(Attch.), 11-26-2019)
Sec. 27-982. General regulations.
All outdoor lighting shall comply with the following general regulations: 
(1)	Canopy-mounted lights. Recessed fixtures shall be used in all under-canopy lighting. No lamps, reflectors, refractors or focusing or diffusing may extend below the underside of the canopy surface. 


(2)	Arrangement and shielding.
a.	Lighting shall be installed to direct light away from abutting lots that are not under common ownership or control with the lot on which the lights are located. Shielding shall be provided to ensure that the light-producing element is not visible from abutting property, measured five feet above grade. 
b.	Light-producing elements shall be concealed or shielded with cutoffs so that no more than 2.5 percent of the light emitted directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture is projected at an angle of more than 90 degrees above nadir and no more than ten percent of the light emitted directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture is projected at an angle of more than 80 degrees above nadir. 
(3)	Light trespass. Light trespass along the lot line of the subject property may not exceed 0.5 foot-candles when abutting an R-zoned lot and may not exceed 3.0 foot-candles when abutting any other zoning district or public right-of-way. Maximum illumination levels are measured five feet above grade or from the top of any fence or masonry wall along the property line. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.272), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-983. Lighting plans.
(a)	General. Outdoor lighting plans demonstrating compliance with applicable regulations of this division are required with the submittal of a site plan unless no new outdoor lighting is proposed on the site, in which case a note shall be placed on the face of the site plan indicating that no new outdoor lighting will be installed. Applicants have two options for the format of required outdoor lighting plans: 
(1)	Submit a lighting plan that complies with the fixture height lighting plan requirements of section 27-983(b); or 
(2)	Submit a photometric plan demonstrating that compliance will be achieved using taller fixture heights, in accordance with section 27-983(c). 
(b)	Option 1: Fixture height standard lighting plan. Option 1 (Fixture Height Standard Lighting Plans) establishes maximum light fixture heights but does not require submittal of a detailed photometric plan. 
(1)	Information required. Fixture height standard lighting plans shall include at least the following: 
a.	A scale drawing of the site with all outdoor lighting locations shown; 
b.	Fixture specifications, including catalog cut-sheets or generic standards; 
c.	Pole type and height of fixture; 
d.	Lamp type and size; and 
e.	Fixture mounting and orientation. 
(2)	Maximum fixture heights. Allowable heights of light fixtures shall be measured from the light-emitting surface to finished grade at the base of the pole. Maximum allowed light fixture heights are based on the (ground-level) horizontal distance between the light fixture and any R zoning district or public right-of-way, as established in table 9-2: 


(c)	Option 2: Photometric study. Under option two (photometric study lighting plan) no maximum fixture heights are established, but applicants are required to submit a photometric study in sufficient detail to demonstrate that all applicable outdoor lighting regulations will be met. The photometric study shall include at least the following: 
(1)	A scale drawing of the site with all outdoor lighting locations shown; 
(2)	Fixture specifications, including catalog cut-sheets or generic standards; 
(3)	Lamp type and size; 
(4)	Fixture mounting heights, mounting orientation, and tilt angles if applicable; and 
(5)	A representative point-by-point illumination array for the site showing property lines and demonstrating compliance with applicable light trespass limits. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.273), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-984. Adverse effects on adjacent properties.
Lighting in all districts shall be established in such a way that no direct light is cast upon or adversely effects adjacent properties and roadways. This section shall not apply to lighting established by governmental authority within public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2019-11-03, § I(Attch.), 11-26-2019)
Secs. 27-985—27-993. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
DIVISION 1. COMMON (PROCEDURAL) PROVISIONS
Sec. 27-994. Applicability.
The common provisions of this division apply to all of the review and approval procedures of this zoning ordinance unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.274), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-995. Georgia Zoning Procedures Law.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A., § 36-66-1 et seq., and in accordance with its requirements. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.275), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-996. Developments of regional impact.
(a)	Any application for a zoning map amendment or special land use permit that constitutes a development of regional impact shall be forwarded to the Atlanta Regional Commission for review. No final local decision may be made on the zoning map amendment or special land use permit until the Atlanta Regional Commission's review is complete, within the time limit specified by state law. 
(b)	Any application for a development permit or building permit that constitutes a development of regional impact shall be forwarded to the Atlanta Regional Commission for review. No final local decision may be made on the application until the Atlanta Regional Commission's review is complete, within the time limit specified by state law. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.276), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-997. Procedures summary table.
Table 10-1 provides a summary of review and decision-making authority under this zoning ordinance. In the event of conflict between table 10-1 and the detailed procedures identified in this zoning ordinance, the detailed procedures govern. 


(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.277), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-998. Preapplication meetings.
(a)	Purpose. Preapplication meetings provide an early opportunity for city staff and applicants to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for development approval under this zoning ordinance. 
(b)	Applicability. Preapplication meetings are required whenever the provisions of this zoning ordinance expressly state that they are required. They are encouraged in all cases. 
(c)	Scheduling. Preapplication meetings shall be scheduled with community development department staff. 
(d)	Guidelines. The community development director may establish guidelines for preapplication meetings, including scheduling deadlines, information that should be provided and any available alternatives to face-to-face meetings, such as telephone conversations and email correspondence. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.278), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-999. Public information meetings.
(a)	Applicability. A public participation plan shall be submitted with all property owner-initiated applications for approval of a zoning map amendment, special land use permit or other zoning approval for which a public information meeting is expressly required under this zoning ordinance. 
(b)	Contents. Required public participation plans shall include: 
(1)	A mailing list of all property owners within 500 feet of the subject property, including name, street address, and tax parcel identification number; and 
(2)	A copy of the letter to be mailed to affected parties identifying the date, time and location of the public information meeting regarding the proposed rezoning, development or use. 
(c)	Timing and location of meeting. The public information meeting shall be held near the subject property within the city no later than the first business day of the month preceding the date of the planning commission public hearing on the subject. 
(d)	Public information meeting summary. The public information meeting summary report shall include at least the following information: 
(1)	A list of meeting attendees; 
(2)	A summary of concerns and issues expressed; and 
(3)	A summary of the applicant's response to concerns and issues expressed. 
(4)	The requirement for a public information meeting and summary report does not mean that a consensus shall be reached on all issues. 
(5)	Applicants who comply with all requirements of this section are deemed to have met their public information meeting obligations under this zoning ordinance, regardless of whether or how many invitees attend the scheduled public information meeting. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.279), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1000. Applications and fees.
(a)	Form of application.
(1)	Applications required under this zoning ordinance shall be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the community development director. 
(2)	The community development director shall develop checklists of application submittal requirements and make those checklists available to the public. 
(b)	Application filing fees. Applications shall be accompanied by the fee amount indicated in the fee schedule that has been approved by city council. Application filing fees are nonrefundable once the application has been accepted and determined to be complete. 
(c)	Application completeness and sufficiency.
(1)	An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes all required information and is accompanied by the required application filing fee. 
(2)	The community development director shall make a determination of application completeness in accordance with the schedule established pursuant to section 27-1001. 
(3)	If an application is determined to be incomplete, the community development director shall provide written notice to the applicant along with an explanation of the application's deficiencies. 
(4)	Once an application has been determined to be incomplete, no further application processing will occur and the incomplete application will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the next processing cycle. 
(5)	Applications deemed complete by the community development director will be placed in the current processing cycle and be reviewed by city staff, affected agencies and other review and decision-making bodies in accordance with applicable review and approval procedures of this zoning ordinance. 
(6)	The community development director may require that applications or plans be revised before being placed on an agenda for possible action if the community development director determines that: 
a.	The application or plan contains one or more significant inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of whether the application or plan complies with applicable regulations; 
b.	The application or plan contains multiple minor inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of whether the application or plan complies with applicable regulations; or 
c.	The decision-making body does not have legal authority to approve the application or plan as submitted. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.280), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1001. Application processing cycles.
The community development director, after consulting with review and decision-making bodies, is authorized to promulgate reasonable application processing cycles and schedules for processing applications under this zoning ordinance. Processing cycles may establish: 
(1)	Deadlines for receipt of complete applications; 
(2)	Timeframes for determination of application completeness; 
(3)	Dates of regular meetings; 
(4)	Timing of staff reviews and reports; 
(5)	Timelines for consideration of comprehensive plan amendments; and 
(6)	Other information regarding administrative practices that will assist applicants and the general public. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.281), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1002. Public hearings.
(a)	Hearing procedures.
(1)	At the beginning of the public hearings scheduled for each meeting, the presiding officer shall read the procedures to be followed at the hearing. Printed copies of all procedures shall be made available to the public at the door of the hearing room. 
(2)	Thereupon, the presiding officer shall call the first case and the hearing body shall consider each application on an individual basis in succession as printed on the published agenda or as otherwise approved by the hearing body, provided, however, that the presiding officer may at his or her discretion call and consider more than one application simultaneously when more than one application involves the same piece of property, and when proceedings would be efficiently completed by combining the hearing and discussion on more than one scheduled matter. 
(3)	All persons wishing to speak at a public hearing shall complete a comment card, stating that person's name, address, and identifying the hearing for which remarks are intended. 
(4)	Upon opening the public hearing, the presiding officer shall recognize the city staff, who shall provide a summary of the application and present any recommendations or results of investigations. The staff shall with respect to each zoning proposal investigate and make an oral statement of its findings regarding each of the governing standards as outlined within this article and provide the hearing body with its recommendation. Any member of the hearing body upon recognition by the presiding officer may ask questions of the staff providing the report or recommendations. 
(5)	Following the report of the staff, the presiding officer shall recognize the applicant or his or her agent, spokesperson, or each of them, who shall present and explain the application. Proponents and opponents of the proposed zoning action shall each be permitted a minimum of ten minutes to present their testimony and any documentary evidence. For multiple zoning actions including any combination of zoning decisions consisting of rezoning, special land use permits, and concurrent variances, an additional time frame of ten minutes for each zoning action shall be allotted to both sides. There shall be a minimum time period of ten minutes allotted to the applicant and any members of the public wishing to speak in favor of an application at the public hearing. The applicant may choose to reserve a portion of the ten minutes allocated to its presentation for rebuttal. The applicant and its proponents may present data, evidence and opinions. The city shall not be obligated to provide the full ten-minute period to the applicants and their supporters if they elect not to use that much time. Any member of the hearing body, upon recognition by the presiding officer, may ask questions of the applicant or agent of the applicant. 
(6)	At the conclusion of the presentation by the applicant and any supporters, the presiding officer shall allocate a minimum time period of ten minutes per application during the public hearing for the opponents to present data, evidence, and opinions. The city shall not be obligated to provide the full ten-minute period to the proponents and opponents if they elect not to use that much time. 
(7)	Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed application under consideration and shall address his or her remarks only to the hearing body. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed application under consideration. The presiding officer may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this procedure 
(8)	At the conclusion of public comment, or upon the expiration of time allotted for public comment, the applicant or his or her agent, shall be allowed a short opportunity for rebuttal and final comment, provided that any time devoted to any rebuttal shall be counted toward the total ten minutes allotted to the applicant under paragraph (5) above. Any member of the hearing body, upon recognition by the presiding officer, may ask questions of the applicant, his or her agent, or both. 
(9)	After the above procedure has been completed, the presiding officer will indicate that the public hearing is closed. Upon the closing of the public hearing, the applicant, his or her agent and any member of the public shall no longer address the hearing body in any way, including hand waving or motion for attention; provided, however, that at any time the presiding officer may permit hearing body members to ask questions directly to the applicant, staff, or any particular speaker. 
(10)	After the public hearing is closed, the hearing body may either vote upon the application or may delay its vote to a subsequent meeting provided that notice of the time, date and location when such application will be further considered shall be announced at the meeting during which the public hearing is held. 
(11)	The planning commission and city council may adopt additional procedures for the conduct of hearings held by their body in addition to and not in conflict with the above. 
(b)	Applicant attendance. Review and decision-making bodies are expressly authorized to postpone public hearings at which an applicant or the applicant's authorized agent does not appear in person. 
(c)	Continuances. A public hearing for which proper notice was given may be continued to a later date without providing additional notice as long as the continuance is set for a specified date and time and that the date and time is announced at the time of the public hearing; and provided further that at least one public hearing is held before city council on the date of the published notice appearing in the newspaper not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days in advance of hearing. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.282), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-06, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1003. Public notices.
(a)	Newspaper notice. Whenever the procedures of this zoning ordinance require that newspaper notice be provided, the notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(b)	Mailed (written) notice.
(1)	Whenever the procedures of this zoning ordinance require that written notices be mailed, the notices shall be sent by United States Postal Service first class mail. 
(2)	Written mailed notice shall be provided to the applicant and to such other property owners specified by ordinance to receive such notice. When such notices have been deposited by staff in the U.S. mail with adequate postage attached, this mailed notice requirement is deemed complete, and failure by any person to receive such mailed notice does not constitute grounds for invalidate any action taken. 
(c)	Posted notice.
(1)	When the procedures of this zoning ordinance require that posted notice be provided, at least one notice sign shall be posted on each public street frontage abutting the subject property in locations plainly visible to passers-by. If the subject application includes an area with more than 500 feet of street frontage on one or more streets, at least one additional sign shall be posted for each 500 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof on such streets. 
(2)	Signs shall be double-faced and oriented so that the face of the sign is perpendicular to the street so as to allow the signs to be read from both directions along the abutting street and sidewalk. 
(3)	Required signs shall be at least six square feet in area. 
(d)	Affidavits. When applicants are required to post or otherwise provide required notices, the applicant shall sign an affidavit attesting to the posting of signs or the providing of notice in accordance with all applicable requirements. Dated photographs of each sign posting shall be provided. 
(e)	Content of notice. All required public hearing notices shall: 
(1)	Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing that is the subject of the notice; 
(2)	Describe the location of the property involved in the application and the action or relief sought; 
(3)	Identify who will conduct the hearing; 
(4)	Indicate where additional information may be obtained; and 
(5)	When the zoning decision requested has been initiated by a party other than the city, the notice shall also state the current and proposed zoning classifications of the property (in the case of rezoning). 
(f)	Constructive notice. Minor defects in required notices will not be deemed to impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice. Minor defects in notice are limited to errors in a legal description or typographical or grammatical errors that do not impede communication of the notice to affected parties. If questions arise at the hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the hearing body shall make a formal finding about whether there was substantial compliance with the notice requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
(g)	Cost. The cost of all required public notices shall be paid by the applicant in addition to all other required application fees. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.283), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1004. Action by review and decision-making bodies.
(a)	Review and decision-making bodies are authorized to take any action that is consistent with: 
(1)	The regulations of this zoning ordinance; 
(2)	Any rules and by-laws that apply to the review or decision-making body; and 
(3)	The notice that was given, provided that the decision-making body may zone to an intermediate classification between the current zoning and any requested zoning, may attach conditions, and may grant partial relief over what was sought, and such action shall be deemed to meet requirements of this paragraph. 
(b)	Review and decision-making bodies are authorized to defer action or continue a hearing in order to receive additional information or further deliberate. 
(c)	Decision-making bodies are authorized to refer matters back to a review body for further deliberations or to obtain additional information. 
(d)	Review and decision-making bodies are authorized to defer action, continue the hearing or deny an application whenever the applicant fails to appear for a scheduled and advertised hearing or whenever the applicant fails at more than one meeting to provide the information or documentation necessary for a competent evaluation of the plan's or application's compliance with applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.284), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1005. Conditions of approval.
(a)	When decision-making bodies approve applications with conditions, the conditions shall relate to a situation created or aggravated by the proposed use or development and shall be roughly proportional to the impacts of the use or development. 
(b)	Any conditions imposed shall comply with the following: 
(1)	Conditions may be imposed to mitigate any possible adverse impacts of the proposal on neighboring persons or properties, consistent with the purposes of this zoning ordinance, the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan and state law. 
(2)	Conditions shall be of sufficient specificity to allow lawful and consistent application and enforcement. 
(3)	Once imposed, conditions run with land and will be enforced on all present and future property owners and successors in interest. 
(4)	Except as otherwise expressly stated, amendments or changes to approved conditions may be approved only by following the same procedures as the original approval (i.e., conditions attached to a special land use permit or variance require the processing of a new application for a special land use permit or variance, in accordance with the procedures of division 3 and division 6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.285), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1006. Burden of proof or persuasion.
Applications shall address relevant review and decision-making criteria. In all cases, the burden is on the applicant to show that an application complies with all applicable review or approval criteria. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.286), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1007. Appeals of city council or ZBA final decisions.
(a)	Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the city council or board of appeals may seek review in the Superior Court of DeKalb County within 30 days of the date of decision, as provided by law. 
(b)	When a petition for a writ of certiorari is filed appealing a board of appeals decision, the board of appeals shall be designated the respondent in certiorari and the City of Brookhaven the defendant in certiorari. The secretary of the board of appeals is authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ on behalf of the board of appeals, as respondent. 
(c)	A person is considered aggrieved for purposes of this section only if the person or their property was the subject of the action appealed from, or the person has a substantial interest in the action being appealed that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.287), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 27-1008—27-1017. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. AMENDMENTS
Sec. 27-1018. Applicability.
The procedures of this division apply to zoning map amendments, zoning ordinance text amendments and amendments to conditions attached to previously approved zoning map amendments. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.288), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1019. Authority to initiate.
Amendments to the zoning map and the text of this zoning ordinance may be initiated by the city council following a motion and a second, official action of the planning commission or by the community development director acting on behalf of the city council. In addition, amendments to the zoning map and amendments to conditions attached to previously approved zoning map amendments may be initiated upon application by the owner of the subject property or the subject property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.289), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1020. Preapplication meeting.
A preapplication meeting with community development department staff is required for all owner-initiated amendment applications (see the preapplication provisions of section 27-998). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.290), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1021. Public Information Meeting
The public information meeting requirements of section 27-999 apply to all owner-initiated applications for zoning map amendments. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.291), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1022. Application filing.
(a)	Owner-initiated applications for zoning map amendments and applications for amendments to conditions attached to previously approved zoning map amendments shall be filed with the community development director. 
(b)	Owner-initiated applications for zoning map amendments and applications for amendments to conditions attached to previously approved zoning map amendments may be proposed with or without conditions. Conditions may include: 
(1)	Written conditions; 
(2)	Site plans, architectural renderings, elevations, photographs, or other graphic representations of the proposed development; or 
(3)	Any combination of written conditions and graphic representations. 
(c)	Any site plan filed as a proposed condition shall be prepared, signed and sealed by an architect, landscape architect or engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(d)	No particular format is required to initiate amendments by the city council, planning commission or community development department staff. Both text amendments and map amendments initiated by the city shall be in complete form prior to the first public hearing. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.292), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1023. Public hearings and notices.
(a)	Public hearings. Any action resulting in a zoning decision shall require a public hearing on the proposed action. 
(1)	Where the proposed action includes any combination of zoning decisions under subparagraphs rezoning, special land use permits, and concurrent variances, only one hearing shall be required under this Code Section. 
(2)	All decision-making powers to a quasi-judicial board to include Planning Commission and Board of Appeals shall provide for a hearing on each proposed action described for zoning decision in Section 27-1384 of the chapter. 
(b)	Notice of public hearings. Notice of required public hearings shall be provided as follows (see section 27-1003 for additional information on required newspaper, mailed and posted notices): 
(1)	Newspaper notice. Newspaper notice is required to be published at least 30 days before but not more than 45 days before the date of the public hearings before the planning commission and city council for all proposals to rezone property, amend the zoning map, adopt a new zoning map, amend the text of the zoning ordinance, or amend conditions previously imposed as a condition of zoning or special land use permit. 
(2)	Mailed notice. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant, all owners of property included within the area that is the subject of the proposed amendment and all owners of property within 250 feet of the subject property. Notices shall be deposited in the mail at least 30 days before but not more than 45 days before the date of the city council public hearing. 
(3)	Posted notice. Notice (signs) shall be posted for all property owner-initiated amendments at least 30 days before but not more than 45 days before the date of the planning commission and city council public hearing. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.293), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-06, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1024. Staff review.
Upon receipt of a complete amendment application, the community development department shall review the proposal and prepare an analysis and recommendation for consideration by the planning commission and city council. This review and analysis shall be transmitted to the planning commission and city council before their public hearings on the matter. The staff report shall also be made available to the applicant and the general public. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.294), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1025. Planning commission public hearing and recommendation.
(a)	The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed amendments. Following the close of the hearing, the planning commission shall act to recommend that the proposed amendment be approved, approved with conditions or denied based on the applicable review and approval criteria of section 27-1027. The planning commission may also recommend deferral of the application, or, upon request of the applicant, withdrawal of the application without prejudice. 
(b)	If the planning commission determines that more information is necessary to make a recommendation, if a revised site plan is submitted after the required deadline for advertising in the newspaper before the scheduled hearing, or upon the request of the applicant or owner, the planning commission may defer the application once for one period of up to 60 days or two zoning cycles, whichever is longer, with the subsequent hearing date based upon the next available hearing on the approved hearing calendar. In the case of deferral, all materials shall be submitted at least 15 days before the subsequent hearing date. In addition, the deferred item will be subjected to an additional planning commission public hearing before being placed on the city council agenda. 
(c)	If an applicant and/or staff recommends or requests a deferral of an application it shall not negate the planning commission's ability for deferment as stated in subsection 27-1025(b). 
(d)	The planning commission's recommendation shall be transmitted to the city council. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.295), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2020-04-02, (TA20-02), 4-28-2020)
Sec. 27-1026. City council public hearing and decision.
(a)	Upon receipt of a recommendation from the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on proposed amendments. Following the close of the public hearing, the city council shall act to approve the proposed amendment, approve the proposed amendment with conditions or deny the proposed amendment based on the applicable review and approval criteria of section 27-1027. The city council is also authorized to defer action on the proposed amendment, refer the application back to planning commission for reconsideration or allow the applicant to withdraw the proposed amendment without prejudice. 
(b)	Neither the recommendation of the staff or the planning commission is binding on the city council. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.296), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1027. Review and approval criteria.
(a)	Zoning map amendments. The following review and approval criteria shall be used in reviewing and taking action on all zoning map amendments: 
(1)	Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)	Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(3)	Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(4)	Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(5)	Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property that provide supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; 
(6)	Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect historic buildings, sites, districts, or archaeological resources; 
(7)	Whether the aesthetic and architectural design of the site is compatible with the intent and requirements of the comprehensive plan, the character area study, and all applicable zoning ordinance regulations; and 
(8)	Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use that will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 

Figure 10-1 - Amendment Process (Generally) 
(b)	Zoning ordinance text amendments. The following review and approval criteria shall be used in reviewing and taking action on all zoning ordinance text amendments: 
(1)	Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)	Whether the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment corrects an error or inconsistency in the zoning ordinance, meets the challenge of a changing condition or is necessary to implement or establish policy. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.297), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1028. Successive applications.
An application for a zoning map amendment or an amendment to one or more conditions attached to previously approved zoning map amendments affecting all or a portion of the same property may not be submitted more than once every 24 months measured from the date of final action by the city council. The city council is authorized to waive or reduce this 24-month time interval by resolution, except that the time interval between the date of action to deny or the date that the application is withdrawn with prejudice and the date of filing of any subsequent amendment affecting the same property may not be less than six months. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.298), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1029. Modifying conditions of approval.
Conditions attached to rezoning approvals may only be modified by city council through the map amendment process, including all requirements for fees, notices and hearings. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.299), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2020-03-07, § I(TA20-01), 3-24-2020; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-06, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1030. Amendments to zoning ordinance involving single-family residential uses.
(a)	This section shall be applicable to zoning decisions related to an amendment of the zoning ordinance to revise one or more zoning classifications or definitions relating to single-family residential uses of property so as to authorize one of the following: 
(1)	Multifamily uses of property, multi-unit buildings, master planned development or mixed use development to include multi-unit buildings, pursuant to such classification or definitions; or 
(2)	Grant blanket permission, under certain or all circumstances, for property owners to deviate from the existing zoning requirements of a single-family residential zoning classification. 
(b)	Zoning decisions applicable to section 27-1030 of the chapter must be adopted in the following manner: 
{1)	The zoning decision shall be adopted at two regular meetings, during a period of not less than 21 days apart. 
(2)	Prior to the first meeting provided for in subparagraph (b)(l) of this paragraph, at least two public hearings shall be held on the proposed action. 
(3)	Such public hearings shall be held at least three months and not more than nine months prior to the date of final action on the zoning decision. At least one of the public hearings must be held between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(4)	The hearings required by this paragraph shall be in addition to any hearing required under section 27-1023 of this Code section. 
(5)	The local government shall give notice of such hearing by: 
a.	Posting notice on each affected premises in the manner prescribed by subsection (b) of this Code section; provided, however, that when more than 500 parcels are affected, in which case posting notice is required every 500 feet in the affected area; and 
b.	Publishing in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the local government a notice of each hearing at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
c.	Both the posted notice and the published notice shall include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning decision relates to or will authorize multifamily uses or give blanket permission to the property owner to deviate from the zoning requirements of a single-family residential zoning of property in classification previously relating to single-family residential uses. 
1.	The published notice shall comply with the following: 
i.	The notice shall be at least nine column inches 190 in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
ii.	The notice shall state that a copy of the proposed amendment is on file in the office of the city clerk or the recording officer of the local government and in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county of the legal situs of the local government for the purpose of examination and inspection by the public. 
(6)	The local government shall furnish anyone, upon written request, a copy of the proposed amendment, at no cost. 
(7)	The provisions of paragraph section 27-1030 shall also apply to any zoning decisions that provide for the abolition of all single-family residential zoning classifications within the territorial boundaries of a local government or zoning decisions that result in the rezoning of all property zoned for single-family residential uses within the territorial boundaries of a local government to multifamily residential uses of property. 
(8)	This section of the zoning ordinance shall not apply to zoning decisions for the rezoning of property from a single-family residential use of property to a multifamily residential use of property when the rezoning is initiated by the owner or authorized agent of the owner of such property. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-06, § I, 6-28-2023)
Secs. 27-1031—27-1039. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. SPECIAL LAND USE PERMITS (SLUPS)
Sec. 27-1040. Applicability.
The procedures of this division apply to all special land use permits (also known as "SLUPs") required under this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.300), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1041. Authority to file.
Applications for special land use permit approval may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.301), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1042. Preapplication meeting.
A preapplication meeting is required for all special land use permits (see the preapplication provisions of section 27-998). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.302), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1043. Public information meeting.
The public information meeting requirements of section 27-999 apply to all applications for special land use permits. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.303), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1044. Application filing.
Special land use permit applications shall be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.304), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1045. Public hearing notices.
Notice of required public hearings shall be provided as follows (see section 27-1003 for additional information on required newspaper, mailed and posted notices): 
(1)	Newspaper notice. Newspaper notice shall be published at least 30 days before but not more than 30 days before the date of the planning commission and city council public hearings. In addition to the notice contents required by section 27-1003, notice of all property owner-initiated amendments shall identify the property's existing and proposed zoning classification. 
(2)	Mailed notice. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant, all owners of property included within the area that is the subject of the proposed amendment and all owners of property within 250 feet of the subject property. Notices shall be deposited in the mail at least 30 days before but not more than 45 days before the date of the planning commission and city council public hearings. 
(3)	Posted notice. Notice (signs) shall be posted at least 15 days before but not more than 45 days before the date of the city council public hearing. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.305), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-06, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1046. Staff review.
Upon receipt of a complete special land use permit application, the community development department shall review the proposal and prepare an analysis and recommendation for consideration by the planning commission and city council. This review and analysis shall be transmitted to the planning commission and city council before their public hearings on the matter. The staff report shall also be made available to the applicant and the general public. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.306), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1047. Planning commission public hearing and recommendation.
(a)	The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the special land use permit application. Following the close of the hearing, the planning commission shall act to recommend that the special land use permit be approved, approved with conditions or denied based on the applicable review and approval criteria of section 27-1049. The planning commission may also recommend deferral of the application, or, upon request of the applicant, withdrawal of the application without prejudice. 
(b)	If the planning commission determines that more information is necessary to make a recommendation, if a revised site plan is submitted after the required deadline for advertising in the newspaper before the scheduled hearing, or upon the request of the applicant or owner, the planning commission may defer the application once for one period of up to 60 days or two zoning cycles, whichever is longer, with the subsequent hearing date based upon the next available hearing on the approved hearing calendar. In the case of deferral, all materials shall be submitted at least 15 days before the subsequent hearing date. In addition, the deferred item will be subjected to an additional planning commission public hearing before being placed on the city council agenda. 
(c)	If an applicant and/or staff recommends or requests a deferral of an application it shall not negate the planning commission's ability for deferment as stated in subsection 27-1047(b). 
(d)	The planning commission's recommendation shall be transmitted to the city council. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.299), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2020-04-02, (TA20-02), 4-28-2020)
Sec. 27-1048. City council public hearing and decision.
(a)	Upon receipt of a recommendation from the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the special land use permit application. Following the close of the public hearing, the city council shall act to approve the special land use permit, approve the special land use permit with conditions or deny the special land use permit based on the applicable review and approval criteria of section 27-1049. The city council is also authorized to defer action on the special land use permit, refer the application back to planning commission for reconsideration or allow the applicant to withdraw the special land use permit without prejudice. 
(b)	Neither the recommendation of the staff or the planning commission is binding on the city council. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.308), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1049. Review and approval criteria.
The following review and approval criteria shall be used in reviewing and taking action on all special land use permit applications: No application for a special land use permit may be granted by the city council unless satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning each of the following considerations: 
(1)	Whether the proposed use is consistent with the comprehensive plan and other adopted policies of the city; 
(2)	Whether the proposed use complies with the requirements of this zoning ordinance; 
(3)	Whether public services, public facilities and utilities are adequate to serve the proposed use; 
(4)	Whether the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of: 
a.	Noise, smoke, odor, dust or vibration generated by the proposed use; 
b.	Hours or manner of operation of the proposed use; and 
c.	Traffic volumes generated by the proposed use; 
(5)	Whether the proposed use would result in an over-concentration of the subject use type within the area of the proposed use; 
(6)	Whether the aesthetic and architectural design of the site is compatible with the intent and requirements of the comprehensive plan, the character area study, and all applicable zoning ordinance regulations; and 
(7)	Whether the proposed use is compatible with adjacent properties and land uses, based on consideration of the size, scale and massing of proposed buildings and the overall site design. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.309), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1050. Successive applications.
If a special land use permit application is denied, an application for a special land use permit affecting all or a portion of the same property may not be resubmitted for 24 months from the date of the denial. The city council is authorized to waive or reduce this 24-month time interval by resolution, except that the time interval between the date of action to deny the application and the date of filing of a subsequent special land use permit application affecting the same property may not be less than six months. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.310), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1051. Transfer.
Approved special land use permits and any attached conditions run with the land and are not affected by changes in tenancy or ownership. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.311), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1052. Modifying conditions of approval.
Conditions attached to previously approved special land use permits may only be modified by city council through the map amendment process, including all requirements for fees, notices and hearings. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.312), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1053—27-1062. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
Sec. 27-1063. Overview.
Master planned development (MPD) zoning districts are established through the approval of a zoning map amendment in accordance with division 2 of this chapter. MPD zoning map amendments shall be accompanied by a preliminary development plan. Submission of a development plan for review and approval is required after approval of the zoning map amendment and preliminary development plan. This article sets forth the required review and approval procedures for MPD preliminary and final development plans. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.313), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1064. Preliminary and final development plan approval required.
Approval of MPD preliminary and final development plans shall occur before any building permit is issued and before any development takes place in a MPD district. Permits may be issued for a development phase if a preliminary development plan has been approved for the entire MPD and a final development plan has been approved for the subject phase pf development. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.314), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1065. Preliminary development plans.
At the option of the applicant, the preliminary development plan may serve also as the preliminary subdivision plat if such intention is declared before the planning commission's hearing and if the plans include all information required for preliminary plats and preliminary development plans. 
(1)	Preapplication meeting. A preapplication meeting is required in accordance with section 27-998. 
(2)	Application filing. An application to establish the MPD district shall be accompanied by a preliminary development plan that includes information as required by the community development department. The application shall be filed with the community development director. 
(3)	Staff review. Upon receipt of a complete MPD preliminary development plan application, the community development department shall review the proposal and prepare an analysis and recommendation for consideration by the planning commission and city council. This review and analysis shall be transmitted to the planning commission and city council before their public hearings on the matter. The staff report shall also be made available to the applicant and the general public. 
(4)	Planning commission public hearing and recommendation. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing and make a recommendation on the proposed MPD zoning map amendment and the preliminary development plan in accordance with section 27-1025. In addition to considering the zoning map amendment review and approval criteria of section 27-1027, the planning commission shall also consider the MPD review criteria of subsection (6) of this section (section 27-1065). 
(5)	City council public hearing and decision. The city council has final decision-making authority on MPD zoning map amendments and preliminary development plans. Before acting, the city council shall hold its own public hearing on the matter in accordance with section 27-1025. Notice of required public hearings shall be provided as required by section 27-1023. In addition to considering the zoning map amendment review and approval criteria of section 27-1027, the city council shall also consider the MPD review criteria of subsection (6) of this section (section 27-1065). 

Figure 10-2 - Special Land Use Permit Process (Generally) 
(6)	Review and approval criteria. In reviewing and making decisions on proposed MPD rezonings and preliminary development plans, review and decision-making bodies shall consider at least the following factors: 
a.	The preliminary development plan's consistency with any adopted plans for the area; 
b.	The preliminary development plan's consistency with the MPD district provisions of article VI, division 3 of this chapter; and 
c.	The sufficiency of the terms and conditions proposed to protect the interest of the public and the residents of the MPD in the case of a plan that proposes development over a long period of time. 
(7)	Lapse of approval. Unless a longer time period or a phasing plan is approved at the time of approval of a MPD preliminary development plan, a complete application for final development plan approval shall be filed within three years of the date of preliminary development plan approval. If an application for final development plan approval is not filed within the time required, no further final development plans may be approved for the project until the subject property owner has filed the original or amended preliminary development plan for re-review and reconsideration by the planning commission and city council. Such re-review and reconsideration shall follow the MPD approval procedures of this division (article X, division 4). Following re-review and reconsideration, the planning commission is authorized to recommend and the city council is authorized to approve any of the following actions based on surrounding land use patterns and other relevant information presented at the time of reconsideration by the planning commission and city council: 
a.	An extension of time for filing a final development plan 
b.	An amendment to the approved preliminary development plan; or 
c.	Rezoning to another zoning district in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of article X, division 2. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.315), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1066. Final development plans.
(a)	Application filing. MPD district final development plan applications shall be filed with the community development director for review and approval after approval of and before the lapse of a preliminary development plan. 
(b)	Consistency with preliminary development plan; major changes. A final development plan will not be considered complete and ready for processing if all approved conditions of approval have not been met or if the final development plan constitutes a major change from the approved preliminary development plan. A final development plan will be considered a major change from (and therefore inconsistent with) the approved preliminary development plan if it: 
(1)	Increases the proposed gross residential density or involves a reduction of one percent or more in the area set aside for open space, recreation area or other similar non-development area, or the substantial relocation of such areas; 
(2)	Increases by more than one percent the total floor area proposed for nonresidential uses; 
(3)	Increases by more than one percent the total ground area covered by buildings; 
(4)	Increases the height of buildings by more than five feet for areas within 100 feet of the outer boundaries of the MPD or by more than ten feet in other areas; or 
(5)	Represents, in the determination of the community development director, a material change to the preliminary development plan approved by city council. 
(c)	Processing of major changes. If a final development plan is submitted that constitutes a major change to an approved preliminary development plan, no further processing of the final development plan may occur. The community development director shall notify the landowner that major changes may be made only after rehearing and re-approval of the preliminary development plan. 
(d)	Community development director review and decision.
(1)	The community development director shall review and take action on the final development plan. The community development director may approve the final development plan if it complies with the approved preliminary development plan, all conditions of the preliminary development plan approval and all applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. If the submitted final development plan does not comply with the approved preliminary development plan, any conditions imposed on that plan or any applicable zoning ordinance regulations, the community development director shall deny approval of the final development plan. 
(2)	If the community development director does not approve the final development plan, the landowner may either: (1) re-submit the final development plan to correct the plan's inconsistencies and deficiencies, or, (2) within 60 days of the date of notice of disapproval, appeal the decision of the community development director to the city council. If such an appeal is filed, a public hearing before the city council shall be scheduled with the same notice required for the MPD rezoning and preliminary development plan approval. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.316), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1067—27-1076. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. CONCURRENT VARIANCES
Sec. 27-1077. Authority.
The city council is authorized to consider and approve, approve with conditions, or deny variances that would otherwise require approval under article X, division 6 simultaneously with an amendment application or a special land use permit application. In such instances, the notices published and posted as provided by section 27-1023 shall also include notice that concurrent variances are being sought. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.317), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1078. Process.
(a)	The planning commission shall make a recommendation on the requested concurrent variance in addition to its recommendation on the companion amendment or SLUP application. 
(b)	The planning commission shall make its recommendation and the city council shall take action on the concurrent variance request in a separate motion after acting on the companion amendment application or SLUP application. 
(c)	Any application for a variance that is not processed simultaneously with an amendment or special land use permit application shall be processed as a separate variance request in accordance with the procedures of article X, division 6. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.318), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1079. Review/decision-making criteria.
In taking action on concurrent variance requests, the city council shall apply the variance review and approval criteria of section 27-1098. The planning com mission's review shall also be based on the variance review and approval criteria of section 27-1098. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.319), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1080. Appeals.
See section 27-1007. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.320), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1081—27-1090. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. VARIANCES
Sec. 27-1091. Applicability.
Except as expressly authorized under the administrative variance procedures of article X, division 8 or the administrative permit procedures of article X, division 9, all requests for relief from strict compliance with the regulations of this zoning ordinance require review and approval by the board of appeals in accordance with the variance procedures of this division. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.321), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1092. Prohibited variances.
The variance procedures of this division may not be used to: 
(1)	Allow a structure or use not authorized in the subject zoning district or a residential density of development that is not authorized within the subject district; 
(2)	Allow an increase in maximum building height; 
(3)	Waive, vary, modify or otherwise override a condition of approval attached to an amendment, special land use permit or other development approval under this zoning ordinance; 
(4)	Reduce, waive or modify in any manner the minimum lot area or lot width required for any lot; 
(5)	Allow the reestablishment of any nonconforming use that has been abandoned or lost its nonconforming rights; 
(6)	Extend the time period for a temporary outdoor social, religious, entertainment or recreation activity approved by the community development director; 
(7)	Decrease open space requirement in the Peachtree Road district, unless approved by city council; 
(8)	Allow the expansion or enlargement of any nonconforming use; or 
(9)	Allow customer contact for a home occupation authorized by this zoning ordinance. 
(10)	Allow reduction of the 75-foot stream buffer for the following land uses: 
a.	Vehicle fuel stations; 
b.	Vehicle maintenance and repair; and 
c.	Laundry facilities. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.322), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-04, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1093. Authority to file.
Applications for approval of variances may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.323), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1094. Preapplication meeting.
A preapplication meeting with community development department staff is required for all variance requests (see the preapplication provisions of section 27-998). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.324), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1095. Application filing.
Variance applications shall be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.325), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1096. Public hearing notices.
Notice of required board of appeals' public hearings shall be provided as follows (see section 27-1003 for additional information on required newspaper, mailed and posted notices): 
(1)	Newspaper notice. Newspaper notice shall be provided at least 30 days before but not more than 45 days before the date of the board of appeals public hearing. 
(2)	Mailed notice. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant, all owners of property within 250 feet of the subject property at least 30 days before the date of the board of appeals public hearing. 
(3)	Posted notice. Notice (signs) shall be posted at least 15 days but not more than 45 days before the date of the board of appeals public hearing. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.326), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-06, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1097. Zoning board of appeals public hearing and decision.
(a)	The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing to consider all variance applications. 
(b)	At the public hearing, the community development department shall introduce the variance request and outline its recommendation based on the criteria of section 27-1098. The applicant for variance shall have the right to present testimony and other evidence in support of the variance request. Proponents and opponents of the variance request shall each be permitted a minimum of ten minutes for each variance request per side to present their testimony and any documentary evidence. For multiple variance requests, an additional time frame of ten minutes for each variance request may be allotted to both sides. The applicant shall have the right to refute by rebuttal any evidence presented by the other side, such rebuttal being limited to five minutes. The session shall be recorded. If the applicant so desires, the applicant may supply a court reporter to take down testimony at the hearing at the applicant's own expense. The zoning board of appeals may ask questions and seek clarification of any testimony or evidence presented. 
(c)	Following the close of the hearing and consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence and matters of record, the board of appeals shall act to approve the variance, approve the variance with conditions or deny the requested variance. The board of appeals is also authorized to defer action on the variance or allow the applicant to withdraw the variance without prejudice. The board's final decision shall be made within a reasonable period of time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the close of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.327), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-06, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1098. Review and approval criteria.
(a)	The board of appeals may authorize variances from the provisions of this zoning ordinance based on consideration of one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)	The grant of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to property or improvements; or 
(2)	The variance request is based on conditions that are: 
a.	Unique to the subject property; 
b.	Not generally applicable to other properties in the same zoning district; 
c.	Not the result of the subject property owner's or applicant's actions; or 
(3)	Because of the particular conditions, shape, size, orientation or topographic conditions, the strict application of the requirements of this zoning ordinance would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other similarly situated property owners; or 
(4)	The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other similarly situated properties; or 
(5)	The literal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of this zoning ordinance would cause undue hardship or practical difficulty, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience; or 
(6)	The requested variance would be consistent with the spirit and purpose of this zoning ordinance and the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.328), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1099. Successive applications.
If a variance application is denied, an application to vary the same zoning ordinance provision for the same portion of the subject property may not be resubmitted for 24 months from the date of the denial. The board of appeals is authorized to waive or reduce this 24-month time interval, provided that the time interval between the date of action to deny the application and the date of filing of a subsequent variance application affecting the same property may not be less than six months. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.329), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1100. Appeals
See section 27-1007. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.330), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1101. Transfer of variances.
Approved variances, and any attached conditions, run with the land and are not affected by changes in tenancy or ownership. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.331), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1102. Amending conditions of approval.
A request for changes in conditions of approval attached to an approved variance shall be processed as a new variance application in accordance with the procedures of this division, including the requirements for fees, notices and hearings. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.332), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1103—27-1112. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. RESERVED
Secs. 27-1113—27-1122. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCES
Sec. 27-1123. Applicability.
The community development director is authorized to approve the following administrative variances: 
(1)	Reduction of front or rear setback requirements by up to ten percent, but not including any transitional buffer; 
(2)	Reduction of street side (corner lot) setback requirement in RS-100, RS-85, RS-75 and RS-60 districts by up to five feet on a lot that does not exceed the minimum lot width required in the subject zoning district, 
(3)	Reduction of interior side setback requirements by up to one foot or 5%, whichever is greater; 
(4)	Reduction of minimum building spacing requirements for multiple buildings on a single lot by up to ten percent as long as the reduction does not reduce the minimum requirement imposed by chapter 7; 
(5)	Increase in the maximum retaining wall height by no more than two feet; and 
(6)	Reduction of the minimum retaining wall setback and distance requirements by no more than two feet. 
(7)	Reduction of minimum off-street parking and loading ratios by up to one space or ten percent, whichever is greater; 
(8)	Reduction of minimum off-street parking ratios for any lot located within 1,000 feet of the boundary of a MARTA rapid transit station by up to three spaces or 25 percent, whichever is greater; and 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.343), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-02-03, § I, 2-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1124. Authority to file.
Applications for approval of administrative variances may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.344), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1125. Application filing.
Administrative variance applications shall be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.345), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1126. Posted notice.
(a)	Notice (signs) shall be posted within ten days of the date of filing an application for an administrative variance. Posted notice shall comply with all applicable provisions of section 27-1003. 
(b)	Citizens and residents of the city wishing to support or oppose a request for administrative variance shall file their comments in writing with the community development director. The deadline for acceptance of comments is 15 days after notice was posted on the property. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.346), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1127. Director's decision.
(a)	The community development director shall review each application for a administrative variance and act to approve the application, approve the application with conditions, deny the application. 
(b)	The community development director may not take final action to approve or deny an administrative variance until at least 15 days after the notice was posted. Any comments received with respect to the administrative variance request shall be taken into account prior to the director reaching his or her decision. All decisions shall be made in writing within 30 days of the date the application was filed unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time for the decision. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.347), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1128. Review and approval criteria.
The community development director's decision to approve or deny a administrative variance shall be based on the variance review and approval criteria of section 27-1098. 

Table 10-3 - Variance Process (Generally) 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.348), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1129. Appeals.
Final decisions on administrative variances may be appealed by any person aggrieved by the decision in accordance with the appeal procedures of article X, division 10. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.349), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1130. Transfer.
Approved administrative variances and any attached conditions, run with the land and are not affected by changes in tenancy or ownership. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.350), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1131. Amending conditions of approval.
A request for changes in conditions of approval attached to an approved administrative variance shall be processed as a new application in accordance with the procedures of this division. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.351), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1132—27-1141. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS
Sec. 27-1142. Applicability.
The community development director and the public works director have the authority to approve certain specified uses and activities by administrative permit pursuant to the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.352), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1143. Authority to file.
Applications for approval of administrative permits may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.353), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1144. Application filing.
Administrative permit applications shall be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.354), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1145. Director's decision.
(a)	The community development director shall review each application for an administrative permit and act to approve the application, approve the application with conditions, or deny the application. 
(b)	A decision to approve or deny shall be based on the review and approval criteria of section 27-1146. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.355), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1146. Review and approval criteria.
Administrative permits may be approved only when the community development director determines that any specific approval criteria associated with the authorized administrative permit and the following general approval criteria have been met: 
(1)	The grant of the administrative permit will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the public or injurious to the property or improvements; 
(2)	The requested administrative permit does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other similarly situated properties; and 
(3)	The requested administrative permit is consistent with all relevant purpose and intent statements of this zoning ordinance and the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.356), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1147. Appeals.
Final decisions on administrative permits may be appealed by any person aggrieved by the decision in accordance with the appeal procedures of article X, division 10. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.357), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1148. Transfer of administrative permit.
Approved administrative permits, and any attached conditions, run with the land and are not affected by changes in tenancy or ownership. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.358), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1149. Amending conditions of approval.
A request for changes in conditions of approval attached to an approved administrative permit shall be processed as a new administrative permit application in accordance with the procedures of this division. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.359), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1150—27-1159. Reserved.
DIVISION 10. APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
Sec. 27-1160. Applicability.
The procedures of this division apply to appeals of administrative decisions. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.360), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1161. Authority to file.
Appeals of administrative decisions may be filed by any person aggrieved by, or by any city official, department, board or agency affected by any final order, requirement, or decision of an administrative official, based on or made in the enforcement of this zoning ordinance. A person may be considered aggrieved for purposes of this subsection only if they are the applicant, the owner of the property that is the subject of the administrative official's decision or they are a person with a substantial interest in the administrative official's decision who is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated, as determined by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.361), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1162. Application filing.
Applications for appeals of administrative decisions shall be filed with the community development director within 15 days of the date of the order, requirement or decision being appealed. Failure to act is not an order, requirement or decision within the meaning of this division. The appeal shall be scheduled to be heard at the next regularly scheduled board of appeals meeting for which required hearing notice can be provided, unless the applicant agrees to a later hearing date. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.362), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1163. Effect of appeal.
The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the official whose decision is being appealed certifies to the board of appeals, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the superior court on notice to the official whose decision is being appealed and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.363), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1164. Record of decision.
Upon receipt of a complete application of appeal, the community development director or other administrative official whose decision is being appealed shall transmit to the board of appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.364), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1165. Hearing notice.
Mailed notice of the board of appeals hearing shall be provided to the appellant at least 15 days before the date of the board of appeals hearing. If the applicant was not the original applicant for relief, the original applicant shall also receive notice. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.365), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1166. Hearing and decision.
(a)	The board of appeals shall hold a hearing to consider all appeals of administrative decisions. The hearing is not a public hearing. The only participants are the appellant, the original applicant if other than the appellant, and the community development director or other administrative official whose decision is being appealed. Participants in the hearing may present testimony, produce documentary evidence and may cross examine testimony and evidence provided by another participant. The board of appeals may ask questions or seek clarification from any participant in the hearing. 
(b)	Following the close of the hearing and consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence and matters of record, the board of appeals shall make a decision. The decision shall be made within a reasonable period of time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the close of the hearing. 
(c)	In exercising its powers, the board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. To that end the board of appeals has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.366), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1167. Review and approval criteria.
An appeal may be sustained only upon a finding by the board of appeals that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.367), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1168. Appeals.
See section 27-1007. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.368), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1169—27-1178. Reserved.
DIVISION 11. REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Sec. 27-1179. Purpose.
For the purposes of this division, "reasonable accommodation" means providing an individual with a disability or developers of housing for individuals with a disability, flexibility in the application of zoning regulations (including the modification or waiver of certain requirements), when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. The purpose of this division is to provide a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Federal Fair Housing Amendments in the application of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.369), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1180. Application filing.
(a)	Applications for reasonable accommodation shall be filed with the community development director. 
(b)	The application shall include a detailed explanation of why the modification is reasonably necessary to make the specific housing available to a person with a disability, including information establishing that the applicant is disabled under applicable laws, as well as other information required by the community development director to make the determination. If the project for which the reasonable accommodation request is being made also requires an additional zoning approval, then the applicant shall file the request concurrently with the application for such approval. 
(c)	No application filing fees are required in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.370), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1181. Review and approval.
The community development director, in consultation with the city attorney, is authorized to consider and act on requests for reasonable accommodation. The community development director shall issue a written decision in which the request is approved, approved subject to conditions, or denied. In making the decision, the following factors shall be considered: 
(1)	Special need created by the disability; 
(2)	Potential benefit that can be accomplished by the requested modification; 
(3)	Need for the requested modification, including alternatives that may provide an equivalent level of benefit; 
(4)	Physical attributes of and any proposed changes to the subject property and structures; 
(5)	Potential impact on surrounding uses; 
(6)	Whether the requested modification would constitute a fundamental alteration of the zoning regulations, policies or procedures of the city; 
(7)	Whether the requested modification would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and 
(8)	Any other factor that my have a bearing on the request. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.371), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1182. Notice of decision.
The written decision of the community development director shall be mailed to the applicant and to all owners of record of all properties abutting the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request. All written decisions shall give notice of the right to appeal a decision of the community development director pursuant to article X, division 10. The decision of the community development director constitutes the final decision of the city, unless appealed. Only the applicant and property owners entitled to notice of the written reasonable accommodation determination have a right to appeal the decision. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.372), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1183. Transfer.
Approved requests for reasonable accommodation are granted to an individual and do not run with the land unless the community development director determines that the modification is physically integrated into the structure and cannot easily be removed or altered to comply with this zoning ordinance or the accommodation is to be used by another individual with a disability. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.373), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1184. Conditions and guarantees.
Before issuance of any permits relative to an approved reasonable accommodation request, the community development director is authorized to require the applicant to record a covenant acknowledging and agreeing to comply with the terms and conditions imposed. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.374), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1185—27-1194. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1. REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES
Sec. 27-1195. Planning commission.
(a)	Establishment, composition and terms.
(1)	The Brookhaven planning commission shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be residents of the city. If a member moves outside the city, such move constitutes a resignation from the planning commission, effective upon the date of such move. 
(2)	Planning commission members shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by a simple majority vote of the city council. 
(3)	Planning commission members serve four-year terms or until their successor is appointed and qualified. 
(4)	Any vacancy in the membership of the planning commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(5)	Planning commissioners may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. 
(6)	Members of the planning commission may not hold any other city office or city-compensated position. 
(7)	The city council is authorized to determine the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the planning commission. 
(8)	The planning commission shall elect one of its members to serve as chairperson. 
(9)	The chairperson of the planning commission serves one year or until reelected or a successor is elected. 
(10)	The city council is authorized to remove any member of the planning commission before the expiration of their term for cause stated in writing and after a public hearing. Planning commission members may be removed by the city council at any time for failure to attend three or more consecutive meetings or for failure to attend 75 percent or more of the meetings within any calendar year or for any other good cause related to performance of duties. 
(b)	Meetings and rules of procedure.
(1)	The planning commission shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the procedures contained in this zoning ordinance. The planning commission is further authorized to adopt rules of procedure governing the conduct of its meetings. The rules of procedure shall be consistent with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. If this zoning ordinance or the rules of procedure do not address a procedural issue that arises,Robert's Rules of Order shall be followed. The planning commission is authorized to amend its rules by majority vote. A copy of the adopted rules of procedure and any subsequent amendment shall be filed by with the city clerk and copies of the rules shall be made available to the public. 
(2)	The date and time of each meeting shall be standardized and regular. Agenda items to be considered shall be publicized in the same manner as meetings of the mayor and city council. The chairperson is authorized to call for special meetings of the planning commission with no less than 24 hours of public notice in advance of any such meeting. 
(3)	A meeting may be canceled by the chairperson or community development director if there are no matters to be acted upon by the planning commission. 
(4)	A quorum of the planning commission consists of a minimum of four members. A quorum is necessary for the planning commission to take official action. All official actions of the planning commission shall be taken by majority vote of the members present. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any planning commission member. 
(5)	At its first regular meeting in January, the planning commission shall, by majority vote of its membership, excluding vacant seats, elect one of its members to serve as chairperson and preside over the board's meetings and one member to serve as vice chairperson. The persons so elected serve in these capacities for terms of one year. Vacancies may be filled for the unexpired terms only by majority vote of the planning commission membership, excluding vacant seats. The chairperson and vice chairperson may take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues. The chairperson and the vice-chairperson may be elected to successive terms without limitation. 
(6)	The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the city or a member of the planning commission. The community development department director, may serve as secretary of the city planning commission, as directed by the mayor. The secretary shall provide such support to the planning commission as is reasonable and necessary to accomplish said commissions' duties. The secretary of the planning commission shall provide the members of the planning commission all information submitted to, or generated by, city staff on each matter to be considered by the planning commission. The secretary is also responsible for maintaining the records of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.375), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1196. Board of appeals.
(a)	Establishment, composition and terms.
(1)	The Brookhaven board of appeals shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be residents of the city. If a member moves outside the city such move constitutes a resignation from the board of appeals, effective upon the date of such move. 
(2)	Board of appeals members shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by a simple majority vote of the of the city council. 
(3)	Board of appeals members serve four-year terms or until their successor is appointed and qualified. 
(4)	Any vacancy in the membership of the board of appeals shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(5)	Board of appeals may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. 
(6)	Members of the board of appeals may not hold any other city office or city-compensated position. 
(7)	The city council is authorized to determine the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the board of appeals. 
(8)	The chairperson of the board of appeals serves one year or until reelected or a successor is elected. 
(9)	The city council is authorized to remove any member of the board of appeals before the expiration of their term for cause stated in writing and after a public hearing. Board of appeals members may be removed by the city council at any time for failure to attend three or more consecutive meetings or for failure to attend 75 percent or more of the meetings within any calendar year or for any other good cause related to performance of duties. 
(b)	Meetings and rules of procedure.
(1)	The board of appeals shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the procedures contained in this zoning ordinance. The board of appeals is further authorized to adopt rules of procedure governing the conduct of its meetings. The rules of procedure shall be consistent with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. If this zoning ordinance or the rules of procedure do not address a procedural issue that arises,Robert's Rules of Order shall be followed. The board of appeals is authorized to amend its rules by majority vote. A copy of the adopted rules of procedure and any subsequent amendment shall be filed by with the city clerk and copies of the rules shall be made available to the public. 
(2)	The date and time of each meeting shall be standardized and regular. Agenda items to be considered shall be publicized in the same manner as meetings of the mayor and city council. The chairperson is authorized to call for special meetings of the board of appeals with no less than 24 hours of public notice in advance of any such meeting. 
(3)	A meeting may be canceled by the chairperson or community development director if there are no matters to be acted upon by the board of appeals. 
(4)	A quorum of the board of appeals consists of a minimum of four members. A quorum is necessary for the board of appeals to take official action. 
(5)	All official actions of the board of appeals shall be taken by majority vote of the members present. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any board of appeals member. 
(6)	At its first regular meeting in January, the board of appeals shall, by majority vote of its membership, excluding vacant seats, elect one of its members to serve as chairperson and preside over the board's meetings and one member to serve as vice chairperson. The persons so elected serve in these capacities for terms of one year. Vacancies may be filled for the unexpired terms only by majority vote of the board of appeals membership, excluding vacant seats. The chairperson and vice chairperson may take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues. The chairperson and the vice-chairperson may be elected to successive terms without limitation. 
(c)	Testimony. All testimony before the board of appeals shall be taken as if under oath regardless of whether or not a formal oath or affirmation is administered. The chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.376), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1197. Community development director.
(a)	General. The community development director is responsible for: 
(1)	The interpretation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this zoning ordinance; 
(2)	Issuing permits as required with respect to this zoning ordinance; and 
(3)	Carrying out those powers and duties expressly identified in this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.377), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1198—27-1207. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. INSPECTIONS
Sec. 27-1208. Right of entry.
Upon the consent of the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, city employees authorized by the mayor and city council or the community development director may enter any property during all reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.378), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1209. Warrants.
The community development director may obtain an inspection warrant authorizing city inspectors to conduct a search or inspection of property, either with or without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched. 
(1)	Inspection warrants may be issued by the municipal court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.	That the person seeking the warrant has established under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection that includes the subject property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity or circumstance that legally justifies such an inspection; 
b.	That issuance of the warrant is authorized by this section; and 
c.	There is probable cause to believe a violation of this division exists. 
(2)	All inspection warrants shall meet all of the following requirements: 
a.	The warrant shall be attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. 
b.	The warrant shall describe, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and shall be sufficiently accurate to allow the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property to reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. 
c.	The warrant shall indicate the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances that the inspection is intended to check or reveal. 
d.	The warrant shall refer, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.379), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1210—27-1219. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 27-1220. Responsibility for enforcement.
The community development director is responsible for the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this zoning ordinance unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.380), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1221. Violations.
It is unlawful and a violation of this zoning ordinance for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or use any land in the city, or cause any of these actions, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance. Any violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance—including but not limited to all of the following—may be subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this zoning ordinance. 
(1)	To use land or buildings in any way not consistent with the requirements of this zoning ordinance; 
(2)	To erect a building or other structure in any way not consistent with the requirements of this zoning ordinance; 
(3)	To engage in the use of a building or land or any other activity requiring one or more permits or approvals under this zoning ordinance without obtaining such required permits or approvals; 
(4)	To engage in the use of a building or land or any other activity requiring one or more permits or approvals under this zoning ordinance in any way inconsistent with any such permit or approval or any conditions imposed on the permit or approval; 
(5)	To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this zoning ordinance or any condition imposed on the permit or approval; 
(6)	To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or otherwise given under this zoning ordinance; 
(7)	To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under this zoning ordinance; or 
(8)	To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.381), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1222. Continuing violations.
Each day that a violation remains uncorrected after receiving notice of the violation from the city constitutes a separate violation of this zoning ordinance, provided that a separate citation is required for each continuing violation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.382), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1223. Remedies and enforcement powers.
The city has all remedies and enforcement powers allowed by law, including the following: 
(1)	Withhold permit. The community development director may deny or withhold permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or improvements upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the city. This enforcement provision may be used regardless of whether the current owner or applicant is responsible for the violation in question. 
(2)	Permits approved with conditions. Instead of withholding or denying a permit or other authorization, the community development director may grant such authorization subject to the condition that the violation be corrected. 
(3)	Revoke permits.
 a.	Any permit, certificate or other form of authorization required under this zoning ordinance may be revoked by the community development director when the community development director determines: 
1.	That there is departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as required under terms of the permit, 
2.	That the development permit was procured by false representation or was issued by mistake, or 
3.	That any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance are being violated. 
b.	Written notice of revocation shall be served upon the owner, the owner's agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the building or structure for which such permit was issued. If no persons can reasonably be served with notice, the notice shall be posted in a prominent location. After delivery or posting of notice, no construction or development may proceed. 
(4)	Withhold public utility service. The community development director may require that public utility service be withheld until such time as the structure or premises are no longer in violation of this zoning ordinance. 
(5)	Stop work. With or without revoking permits, the community development director may order work to be stopped on any building or structure on any land on which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a permit or other form of authorization issued under the zoning ordinance. 
(6)	Revoke plan or other approval. Where a violation of this zoning ordinance involves a failure to comply with approved plans or conditions to which the approval of such plans was made subject, the community development director may, upon notice to the applicant and other known interested parties (including any holders of building permits affected) (a) revoke the plan or other approval or (b) condition its continuance on strict compliance with this zoning ordinance or the provision of security to ensure that construction is completed in compliance with approved plans, or such other conditions as the community development director may reasonably impose. 
(7)	Injunctive relief. The city may seek an injunction or other equitable relief in court to stop any violation of this zoning ordinance or of a permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted under the zoning ordinance. 
(8)	Abatement. The city may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus, abatement, injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition in which they existed prior to the violation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.383), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1224. Other penalties, remedies and powers.
In addition to all other actions and penalties authorized in this article, the city attorney is authorized to institute injunctive, abatement or any other appropriate judicial or administrative actions or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of this zoning ordinance. The city may also, after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of this zoning ordinance requiring the presence of the violator in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.384), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1225. Continuation of previous enforcement actions.
Nothing in this zoning ordinance prohibits the continuation of previous enforcement actions, undertaken by the city pursuant to previous valid ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.385), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1226. Remedies cumulative.
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this zoning ordinance are cumulative, and the city may exercise them in any combination or order. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.386), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1227. Persons subject to penalties.
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, or agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violations may each be found guilty of a separate offense and be subject to penalties, remedies and enforcement actions. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.387), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1228. Enforcement procedures.
(a)	Non-emergency matters. In the case of violations of this zoning ordinance that do not constitute an emergency or require immediate attention, the community development director shall give notice of the nature of the violation to the property owner or to any other person who is party to the approval or to any applicant for any relevant permit in the manner stated in this section, after which the persons receiving notice have ten days to correct the violation before further enforcement action may be taken. Notice shall be given in person by hand delivery or by U.S. Mail. Notices of violation shall state the nature of the violation and the time period for compliance and may state the corrective steps necessary and the nature of subsequent penalties and enforcement actions should the situation not be corrected. When no current address exists for the owner and attempts to reach the owner have been unsuccessful, notice may be posted on the property. In that case, documentation shall be maintained in the case fie of the unsuccessful attempts to reach the property owner and a photograph of the posted notice shall be retained as part of the case file. 
(b)	Emergency matters. In the case of violations of this zoning ordinance that constitute an emergency situation as a result of public health or safety concerns or violations that will create increased problems or costs if not remedied immediately, the city may use the enforcement powers available under this zoning ordinance without prior notice, but the community development director shall attempt to give notice simultaneously with beginning enforcement action. Notice may be provided to the property owner, to any other person who is party to the approval and to applicants for any relevant permit. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.388), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1229—27-1238. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. NONCONFORMITIES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 27-1239. Scope.
The regulations of this article govern nonconformities, which are lots, uses and structures that were lawfully established but—because of the adoption of new or amended regulations—no longer comply with one or more provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.389), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1240. Intent.
Occasionally, lots, uses, and structures that were lawfully established (i.e., in compliance with all regulations in effect at the time of their establishment) are made nonconforming because of changes in the zoning regulations that apply to the subject property (e.g., through zoning map changes or amendments to the text of the zoning ordinance). The regulations of this article are intended to clarify the effect of this "nonconforming" status and avoid confusion with "illegal" buildings and uses (i.e., those established in violation of applicable zoning regulations). The regulations of this article are also intended to: 
(1)	Recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use their property for uses and activities that were lawfully established; 
(2)	Promote maintenance, reuse and rehabilitation of existing buildings; and 
(3)	Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have the potential to adversely affect surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.390), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1241. Authority to continue.
Any nonconformity that existed on the effective date specified in section 27-4 or any situation that becomes nonconforming upon adoption of any amendment to this zoning ordinance may be continued in accordance with the regulations of this article unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.391), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1242. Determination of nonconformity status.
(a)	The burden of proving a nonconformity was lawfully established and that the situation has not lost its nonconforming status rests entirely with the subject landowner. 
(b)	The community development director is authorized to determine whether adequate proof of nonconforming status has been provided by the subject landowner. 
(c)	Appeals of the community development director's decision on nonconforming status determinations may be appealed in accordance with the appeal procedures of article X, division 10 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.392), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1243. Repairs and maintenance.
(a)	Nonconformities shall be maintained to be safe and in good repair. 
(b)	Repairs and normal maintenance that do not increase the extent of nonconformity and that are necessary to keep a nonconformity in sound condition are permitted unless otherwise expressly prohibited by this zoning ordinance. 
(c)	Nothing in this article is intended to prevent nonconformities from being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition in accordance with an order from a duly authorized city official. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.393), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1244. Change of tenancy or ownership.
Nonconforming status runs with the land and is not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership or management. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.394), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1245—27-1254. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. NONCONFORMING LOTS
Sec. 27-1255. Description.
A nonconforming lot is a lawfully created lot recorded in the office of the clerk of county superior court that does not comply with one or more applicable minimum lot area, lot width, lot frontage or street access regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.395), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1256. Use of nonconforming lots.
(a)	A single dwelling unit and allowed accessory structures may be constructed on a nonconforming lot in any zoning district that permits detached houses by-right, subject to compliance with all applicable setback and building regulations (e.g., coverage, height, floor area, etc.). 
(b)	Nonconforming lots in districts that do not permit detached houses by-right, may be used in accordance with the use regulations that apply in the subject zoning district, and buildings may be erected, subject to compliance with all applicable setback and building regulations (e.g., coverage, height, floor area, etc.). 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.396), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1257. Reduction of impervious coverage.
Nonconforming lots may be altered to remove and replace structures and improvements if such alteration does not increase overall impervious coverage and complies with all other applicable regulations of this division. See also section 27-1333. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.397), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-11-03, § I(Attch.), 11-26-2019; Ord. No. RZ-2023-02-03, § I, 2-28-2023)
Secs. 27-1258—27-1267. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
Sec. 27-1268. Description.
A nonconforming structure is any building or structure, other than a sign, that was lawfully established but no longer complies with the lot and building regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.398), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1269. General.
Nonconforming structures may remain, subject to the regulations of this section. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.399), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1270. Alterations and expansions.
Alterations, including enlargements and expansions, are permitted if the proposed alteration or expansion complies with all applicable lot and building regulations, and does not increase the extent of nonconformity. A building with a nonconforming front setback, for example, may be expanded to the rear as long as the rear expansion complies with applicable rear setback standards and all other applicable lot and building regulations. On the other hand, a multi-dwelling building that is nonconforming with regard to density (i.e., contains more dwelling units than allowed by the underlying zoning) may not be expanded to add additional dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.400), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1271. Use.
A nonconforming structure may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which the structure is located. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.401), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1272. Loss of nonconforming status.
(a)	Intentional actions. When a nonconforming structure is demolished, damaged or destroyed intentionally or by a deliberate action of the subject property owner and the extent of demolition, damage or destruction is more than 60 percent of the fair market value of the structure, based on the assessed valuation from real property records maintained by the tax assessor, the structure may not be reestablished except in compliance with all regulations applicable to the zoning district in which it is located. See section 27-159 for special regulations that apply to garages and carports. 
(b)	Accidental damage or destruction. When a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged by acts of God, accidental fire or other causes beyond the control of the subject property owner, the structure may be restored or repaired, provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing extent of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or damaged structure shall be obtained within two years of the date of occurrence of such damage. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.402), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1273—27-1282. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. NONCONFORMING USES
Sec. 27-1283. Description.
A nonconforming use is a land use that was lawfully established in accordance with all zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment but that is no longer allowed by the use regulations of the zoning district in which the use is now located. Lawfully established uses that do not comply with any applicable separation (or spacing) distance requirements (e.g., those that require one land use to be located a certain minimum distance from another land use) are also deemed nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.403), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1284. Change of use.
A nonconforming use may be changed to any other use that is allowed in the subject zoning district. Once changed to a conforming use, a nonconforming use may not be re-established. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.404), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1285. Expansion of use.
A nonconforming use may not be expanded unless such expansion would eliminate or reduce the extent of nonconformity, except that a nonconforming use of a building may be extended into those interior parts of the building that were manifestly designed for such use before the date that the use became nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.405), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1286. Remodeling and improvements.
A building in which a nonconforming use is located may be remodeled or otherwise improved as long as the remodeling or improvements do not violate the other regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.406), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1287. Moving.
(a)	A nonconforming use may be moved in whole or in part to another location on the same lot only if the movement or relocation eliminates or reduces the extent of nonconformity. 
(b)	A nonconforming use may be moved to another lot only if the use is allowed under the zoning regulations that apply to that (relocation) lot. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.407), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1288. Loss of nonconforming status.
(a)	Abandonment.
(1)	Once a nonconforming use is abandoned, its nonconforming status is lost and any new, replacement use shall comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(2)	A nonconforming use is presumed abandoned when the use is discontinued or ceases for a continuous period of six months or more. 
(3)	A nonconforming open-air use of land is presumed abandoned when the use is discontinued for a continuous period of six months or more. 
a.	The presumption of abandonment may be rebutted upon showing, to the satisfaction of the community development director, that during such period the owner of the land or structure has been: 
b.	Maintaining the land and structure in accordance with all applicable municipal code requirements and did not intend to discontinue the use; 
c.	Actively and continuously marketing the land or structure for sale or lease for that particular nonconforming use; or 
d.	Engaged in other activities that affirmatively prove there was not intent to abandon. 
(4)	Any period of discontinued use caused by government action, acts of God, unintended fire or other causes beyond the control of the subject property owner are not counted in calculating the length of discontinuance. 
(b)	Change to conforming use. If a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, no matter how short the period of time, all nonconforming use rights are lost and re-establishment of the nonconforming use is prohibited. 
(c)	Destruction.
(1)	Intentional destruction. When a building containing a nonconforming use is intentionally destroyed, razed or dismantled by a deliberate act of the owner or the owner's agent, re-establishment of the nonconforming use is prohibited. 
(2)	Accidental destruction. Unless a building containing a nonconforming use is loses its nonconforming use rights pursuant to article XII, division 3, the building and use may be restored or repaired provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or damaged building shall be obtained within two years of the date of occurrence of such damage. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.408), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1289—27-1298. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT FEATURES
Sec. 27-1299. Description.
A nonconforming development feature is any aspect of a development—other than a nonconforming lot, nonconforming structure or nonconforming use—that was lawfully established, in accordance with zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment but that no longer complies with one or more regulations of this zoning ordinance. Common examples of nonconforming development features are off-street parking or loading areas that contain fewer spaces than required by current regulations and sites that do not comply with current landscaping or screening requirements. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.409), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1300. General.
Nonconforming development features may remain except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance, but the nature and extent of nonconforming site features may not be increased except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.410), 11-27-2018)
Secs. 27-1301—27-1310. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. TERMINOLOGY AND MEASUREMENTS
DIVISION 1. LANGUAGE AND ORDINANCE CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 27-1311. Meanings and intent.
Words and terms expressly defined in this zoning ordinance including those defined in article XIII, division 4 have the specific meanings assigned unless the context indicates another meaning. Words that are not expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have their ordinary dictionary meaning. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.411), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1312. Computation of time.
(a)	References to "days" are to calendar days unless otherwise expressly stated. References to "business days" are references to regular city government working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays observed by city government. 
(b)	The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, holiday observed by city government or other day on which city offices are closed, that day is excluded. 
(c)	A day concludes at the close of business and any materials received after that time will be considered to have been received the following day. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.412), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1313. Tenses and usage.
(a)	Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true. 
(b)	Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is also true. 
(c)	The words "shall," "will," and "shall" are mandatory. 
(d)	The word "may" is permissive, not mandatory or required, but the phrase "may not" means that the referenced action is expressly prohibited. 
(e)	Phrases that include numbers, such as "up to x," "not more than x" and "a maximum of x" all include "x." 
(f)	The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, limited liability company, trust, or corporation, as well as an individual. 
(g)	The words "used" and "occupied" include "intended and designed to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.413), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1314. Conjunctions.
Unless the context otherwise expressly indicates, conjunctions have the following meanings: 
(1)	"And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and 
(2)	"Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singularly or in combination. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.414), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1315. Headings and illustrations.
Headings and illustrations are provided for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any provision of this zoning ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this zoning ordinance and any heading, drawing, table, figure or illustration, the text governs. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.415), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1316. Versions and citations.
All references in this zoning ordinance to other city, state or federal regulations are to be construed as referring to the most up-to-date version and citation for those regulations, unless otherwise expressly indicated. When the referenced regulations have been repealed and not replaced by other regulations, zoning ordinance requirements for compliance with the other specifically referenced city, state or federal regulation are no longer in effect. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.416), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1317. Lists and examples.
Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of examples that use "including," "such as," or similar terms are intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive lists of all possibilities. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.417), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1318. Public officials and agencies.
References in this zoning ordinance to public officials and agencies will be interpreted as follows: 
(1)	References to the "city" are references to the City of Brookhaven. 
(2)	References to the "city council" are references to the Brookhaven City Council. 
(3)	References to the "community development director" are references to the director of the City of Brookhaven Community Development Department who is responsible for overall zoning ordinance administration and assignment of day-to-day staffing duties and responsibilities. 
(4)	References to the "planning commission" are references to the City of Brookhaven Planning Commission. 
(5)	References to the "board of appeals" are references to the City of City of Brookhaven Board of Appeals. 
(6)	Unless otherwise expressly stated, all other employees, public officials, bodies and agencies to which references are made are those of the city or individuals or agencies legally authorized to act on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.418), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-04, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 27-1319—27-1328. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. MEASUREMENT-RELATED TERMS
Sec. 27-1329. Fractions and rounding.
When calculations required under this zoning ordinance result in fractions, the results shall be rounded as follows: 
(1)	Minimum requirements.
 a.	When calculating minimum off-street parking requirements, any fractional result of less than one-half is rounded down to the whole number and any fractional result of one-half or more is rounded up to the whole number. 
b.	When a requirement other than off-street parking is expressed as a minimum requirement, any fractional result shall be rounded up to the next consecutive whole number. 
(2)	Maximum limits. When a regulation is expressed as a maximum limit, any fractional result shall be rounded down to the preceding whole number. For example, if a maximum limit of 3.33 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area is applied to an 8,000 square foot building, the resulting fraction of 26.64 is rounded down to 26 allowed parking spaces. This provision is not to be interpreted as allowing fractional results to be rounded down when determining compliance with percentage-based limits. For example, if maximum allowed impervious coverage is 45 percent, a lot with 45.33 percent coverage is not considered to be in compliance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.419), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-02-03, § I, 2-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1330. Lot area.
Lot area is measured as the total ground-level surface area contained within the property lines of a lot. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.420), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1331. Lot width.
Lot width is the horizontal distance between the side property lines of a lot, measured at the minimum front setback line. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.421), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Sec. 27-1332. Lot frontage or street frontage.
Lot frontage is measured between side property lines of a lot along the property line that abuts the street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.422), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1333. Impervious coverage.
(a)	Impervious coverage is the total area of a lot covered by impervious surfaces, including principal and accessory buildings and structures, driveways, patios, parking lots and sidewalks. 
(b)	Nonconforming lots may be altered to remove, replace, and reconfigure structures and improvements provided that: 
(1)	The existing impervious coverage was lawfully established; 
(2)	The lot modifications do not result in more impervious coverage; 
(3)	Water quality and stormwater mitigation measures are provided to account for all impervious surface coverage in excess of that allowed under existing zoning. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.423), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-02-03, § I, 2-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1334. Floor area.
(a)	The floor area of a building is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors within the building, excluding garages and open porches. 
(1)	Floor area of principal buildings is measured from the interior face of the exterior walls of the building. 
(2)	Floor area of accessory buildings is measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of the building. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.424), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-02-03, § I, 2-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1335. Density.
Density is measured as the number of dwelling units per acre of land area. In calculating density, public rights-of-way are not counted. Workforce housing units provided to meet mandatory requirements or incentive-based workforce housing provisions shall not be counted as dwelling units for purpose of calculating the maximum allowable density allowed on the subject property, 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.425), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1336. Setbacks.
(a)	Measurement.
(1)	Required setbacks are measured from the applicable lot line, right-of-way, or location referred to below. Building setbacks are measured to the nearest exterior building wall. Minimum setbacks that apply to other features (parking areas, fences, storage areas) are measured from the nearest point of the area or feature for which a setback is required. Unless otherwise expressly stated, no part of any structure may be located within the street right-of-way. 
(2)	Street (front and street-side) setbacks are measured from the actual right-of-way line of the street (other than an alley). 
(3)	Interior side setbacks are measured from the nearest side lot line that does not abut a street. 
(4)	Rear setbacks are measured from the rear lot line. 


(5)	On double-frontage lots, the required street setback shall be provided from both streets. 
(b)	Setbacks on irregular lots. Setbacks are measured from lot lines towards the center of the lot, except as follows: 
(1)	When lot lines are curvilinear, setbacks shall be measured parallel to the curvilinear lot line (see figure 13-1). 
(2)	When there are multiple rear lot lines, the rear setback shall be measured from each of rear lot lines (see figure 13-2). 


(3)	When there is no rear lot line, the rear setback shall be measured as a radial distance from the intersection of side lot lines at the rear of the lot (see figure 13-3). 


(c)	Encroachments and obstructions. Every part of a required setback shall be unobstructed and open to the sky except as follows: 
(1)	Sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, chimneys, buttresses and other ornamental and architectural features, may project up to three feet into any required setback; 
(2)	Porches, terraces, patios, steps, stoops and similar building fixtures may project into a front setback or rear setback for up to ten feet, and into a side setback to a point not closer than five feet to any side lot line. 
(d)	Average front yard setback for residential infill.
(1)	Generally applicable regulations.
a.	When a lot is located within a block where 60 percent or more of the lots within said block have been developed, and where there are existing buildings fronting on the same street and within the same zoning district within 75 feet of the side lot lines of such vacant lot, then setback averaging shall be required. The minimum required building setback line for said vacant lot shall be determined by averaging the existing building setbacks of buildings within 75 feet of the side lot lines of such vacant lot. The minimum setback for additions to existing structures may be the average of the existing setbacks. 
(2)	Administrative variance from average front yard setback provisions.
a.	The director is authorized to consider an administrative variance on petitions requesting reduction of the average front yard setback pursuant to the procedures provided in article X of this chapter. Administrative variance approval shall be based on unique site features including stream buffer protection, tree preservation, and existing easements only. The average front yard setback for residential infill may be reduced up to 25 percent. Appropriate conditions to said administrative variances shall be imposed to ensure the continued health of any preserved trees following the granting of such variances, including, but not limited to, mandatory replacement requirements. The department shall issue a decision in writing no later than 21 business days after the date of filing a complete application. A denied petition for an administrative variance by the director may be presented to the board of appeals as a regular variance, following the general procedures herein. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.426), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2021-02-01, § I(Attch.), 2-9-2021)
Sec. 27-1337. Build-to-zone.
(a)	The build-to zone is the area on the lot where all or a portion of the street-facing building façade shall be located, established as a minimum and maximum setback range. 
(b)	The street-facing building façade shall be located in and extend along the length of the build-to-zone for a minimum distance equal to a percentage of the width of the lot, as required by specific provisions of this zoning ordinance. The required minimum percentage is calculated by dividing the width of the building façade located within the build-to-zone by the width of the lot. For purposes of this calculation, the width of the lot is the narrowest width of the lot within the build-to-zone. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.427), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1338. Height.
(a)	Building height.
(1)	Measurement in feet.
a.	When expressed as a regulation in "feet," building height is measured from average grade along all sides of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; to the deck lines of a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. 
b.	Except in the /AE overlay district, chimneys, elevators, equipment penthouses, belfries, clock towers, cupolas, spires and similar non-habitable structures and features may exceed maximum building height limits that are expressed in feet, provided such features cover no more than 25 percent of the total roof area of the building. 
(2)	Residential infill and redevelopment.
a.	The proposed front door threshold elevation for any new detached house may not be more than two feet higher than the front door threshold elevation of the residential structure that existed on the lot prior to demolition. If the proposed construction would require alteration or eradication of the original threshold, then the original threshold elevation must be measured and certified by a licensed surveyor or engineer. 
b.	The community development director is authorized to approve proposed front door threshold elevations for new detached houses that exceed the threshold elevation allowed by subsection (2)a if the applicant for a building permit establishes that the elevation of the front door threshold of the proposed residential structure does not exceed the average elevation of the front door thresholds of the residential structures on both lots immediately abutting the subject lot. When using threshold height averaging, the applicant must provide the community development director with the threshold elevations, as certified by a licensed surveyor or engineer. 


(3)	Measurement in stories.
a.	A building "story" includes any portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above or, if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Each floor or level in a multistory building used for parking, excluding a basement, is considered a story. 
b.	When building height regulations are expressed in terms of building "stories," headhouses, mechanical equipment normally built above the roof and not designed or used for human occupancy and roof structures that are completely open on at least three sides are not counted as stories. Any enclosed structure that is designed or used for human occupancy is counted as a "story" if the total area of such enclosed structures exceed in the aggregate: 330 square feet if the total roof area of the building is 3,300 square feet or less; or ten percent of the total roof area of the building if the total roof area is greater than 3,300 square feet. 
c.	Minimum and maximum story (floor-to-floor) heights shall be met along all street facing facades and for at least 75 percent of the floor area of each story. 
d.	In measuring building height, stories with a floor-to-floor height of 18 feet or greater are counted as two stories. 
e.	The following requirements apply to all building types required to be at least two stories in height: 
1.	The second story floor area shall be covered and enclosed and equal at least 75 percent of the first story floor area; 
2.	The second floor facade shall extend the entire width of any first floor building facade that fronts on Peachtree Road or Apple Valley Road, except for second story areas used for unenclosed or uncovered outdoor dining area, uncovered decks, uncovered balconies, unenclosed stairs and uncovered atriums; and 
3.	The entire indoor area of the second floor shall be conditioned space (HVAC) and available for human occupancy. 
f.	Building types subject to minimum overall height limits shall meet the applicable minimum height requirement along street-facing facades for a depth of at least 30 feet into the building. 
g.	Maximum overall building height limits apply to the entire building. 
(b)	Retaining wall height. Retaining wall height is measured vertically from the finished grade on the exposed side of the retaining wall to the highest point of the wall. 
(c)	Height of other structures. The height of structures other than buildings and retaining walls is measured as vertical distance from the average finished grade on all sides at the base of the structure to the highest point of the structure. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.428), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-05-03, § I(Attch.), 5-28-2019)
Secs. 27-1339—27-1348. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. USE-RELATED TERMS
DIVISION 4. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Sec. 27-1359. Terms beginning with "A".
Abut or abutting. To touch or share a contiguous boundary or border. 
Accessory building. A subordinate building detached from but located on the same lot as the principal building. See also article VII, division 11 of this chapter. 
Accessory dwelling unit (ADU). An ancillary or secondary living unit existing either within the same structure or on the same lot as the principal dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units are also known as backyard cottages, carriage houses, in-law suites, granny flats, secondary suites, etc. 
Accessory dwelling unit, attached (AADU). An accessory dwelling unit that exists within and/or is not separated from the principal dwelling unit. 

Accessory dwelling unit, detached (DADU). An accessory dwelling unit that is entirely free standing and separated from the principal dwelling unit on the property. 

Accessory structure. A subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the principal building. See also article VII, division 11 of this chapter. 
Accessory use. A use that is incidental to and customarily associated with the principal use of the subject lot. See also article VII, division 11 of this chapter. 
Adjacent. Lying near or in the immediate vicinity. 
Administrative permit. See article X, division 9 of this chapter. 
Agent. A person duly authorized to act on behalf of the owner of the subject property. 
Alley. A public right-of-way that affords a means of access to abutting property, generally secondary in nature. 
Animal, companion. Animals that are commonly kept by persons as a pet or for companionship. Companion animals have the following characteristics: have a special and close relationship with humans; are partially or totally dependent on people; commonly live inside a residence in close proximity with humans; form bonds with people; and interact with their human companions. Dogs and cats are common companion animals. 
Antenna. For the purpose of administering and interpreting the wireless communication facility regulations of article VII, division 9 of this chapter, this term means, communications equipment that transmits, receives or transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communications services. For purposes of administering and interpreting other regulations of this chapter, the term means equipment designed to transmit or receive radio or electronic signals, including but not limited to directional antennae, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas. 
Applicant. The party applying for permits or other approvals required by this chapter. 
Archaeological resource. Any material remains of past human culture or activities that are at least 200 years of age and are of archaeological interest, including basketry, bottles, carvings, graves, human skeletal materials, pit houses, pottery, rock intaglios, rock paintings, soapstone quarries, structures or portions of structures, tools, weapons, weapon projectiles, or any portion or piece of any of the foregoing items. 
Arterial street. A street identified by the Comprehensive Transportation Plan as a major arterial street or minor arterial street. 
Attached house building. A building that is occupied by multiple dwelling units, each located on its own lot with a common or abutting wall along the dwelling units' shared lot lines. Each dwelling unit has its own external entrance. 
Authorized use. A use identified in this zoning ordinance as allowed as-of-right or upon approval of a special land use permit. 
Automobile. A self-propelled, free-moving vehicle, with not more than six wheels, usually used to transport not more than seven passengers and licensed by the appropriate state agency as a passenger vehicle. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.429), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, 12-19-2023)
Sec. 27-1360. Terms beginning with "B".
Base (zoning) district. Any zoning district that is not an overlay district. 
Basement. A space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-half feet. 
Base station. A station at a specific site authorized to communicate with mobile stations, generally consisting of radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial cables, power supplies and other associated electronics. 
Bioretention. The use of soil and plants to remove pollutants from stormwater runoff. 
Block face. All lots abutting one side of a street between the two nearest intersecting streets. 
BTZ. Build-to-zone, which is the area on the lot where all or a portion of the street-facing building façade shall located (see also section 27-1337). 
Buildable area. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum setbacks and open space requirements of this zoning ordinance have been met. 
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building, accessory. See "accessory building." 
Building footprint. The outline of the total area covered by a building's perimeter at the ground level. 
Building, principal. A building in which the principal use of the lot is located. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.430), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, 12-19-2023)
Sec. 27-1361. Terms beginning with "C".
Caliper. The diameter of the tree trunk measured at a point six inches above the root ball or soil level. 
Car-share program. A system in which a fleet of cars (or other motor vehicles) is made available for use by members of the car-share program and that exhibit all of the following characteristics: 
(1)	Members are permitted to use vehicles from the car-share program fleet on an hourly basis; 
(2)	Car-share vehicles are generally available 24 hours a day and seven days a week to members in parking spaces at dispersed locations or facilities; and 
(3)	No separate written agreement is required each time a member reserves and uses a car-share vehicle. 
Car-share vehicle. A motor vehicle from a car-share program fleet. 
Civic building. A building used exclusively to accommodate public and civic uses. 
Collector street. A street identified by the Comprehensive Transportation Plan as a collector street 
Commercial district. See article IV. 
Commercial house building. A building that has been converted from a detached house or that generally resembles a detached house and that is exclusively used to accommodate allowed nonresidential uses. 
Common ownership. Ownership as recognized by law of real property by two or more persons, their parents, brothers, sisters, children over the age of 18 years, spouses or any association, firm, corporation or partnership in which such person or spouse is a corporate officer, partner or is a stockholder with an ownership interest of ten percent or more. 
Composting. The controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Condominium. A building, or group of buildings, in which dwelling units, offices, or floor area are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis in compliance with state law. 
Courtyard housing. A series of small, detached or attached dwelling units arranged around a shared courtyard or open space feature. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.431), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1362. Terms beginning with "D".
Detached house. A building, other than a manufactured housing unit or mobile home, that contains only one dwelling unit and that is located on a single lot not occupied by other principal buildings. 
Development permit. Any permit that authorizes land disturbance for the use, construction thereon or alteration of any real property. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH). The diameter of a tree trunk measured at a point four and one-half feet above ground level at the base of the tree. 
Distributed antenna systems ("DAS"). A network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure. 
Donation box. Any unattended container, receptacle, or similar device used for soliciting and collecting donations of clothing or other salvageable personal property. The term "donation box" shall not include the following: (a) an unattended container, receptacle, or similar device located within the interior of an enclosed building; (b) drop boxes for books and audio-visual materials utilized by a public library; or (c) small drop boxes for books and pantry items utilized by a residential street or a residential neighborhood and located on a residential lot. 
Dripline. A vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground. 
Driveway. A roadway that provides access for vehicles from a street or alley to a lot, garage, dwelling, building, or structure. 
Dwelling unit. One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.432), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-07, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1363. Terms beginning with "E".
Eco-art. Any art form using natural resources to enhance the built environment. The duration of eco-art may be impermanent or may transition through the change of the seasons. 
Electric assist bicycle. Any bicycle that is integrated with an electric motor used to assist propulsion provided that the rider maintains the ability to pedal. Also known as E-Bikes, Pedelecs (pedal electric cycle), or EPAC (electronically power assisted cycle). 
Electric assist bicycle charging station. A public or private bicycle parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment. 
Electric assist bicycle parking space. Any bicycle parking space that is clearly identified to be used exclusively for the parking of an electric assist bicycle. 
Electric vehicle. Any vehicle that is licensed and registered for operation on public and private highways, roads, and streets; either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid or an off-board source, that is stored on-board via a battery. "Electric vehicle" includes: (1) battery electric vehicles; and (2) plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. 
Electric vehicle (EV) charging station. A public or private parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment. 
Electric vehicle charging station, private (restricted-access). An EV charging station that is not available for use by the general public. Examples include electric vehicle charging stations that serve residential homeowners or renters, executive parking areas, designated employee parking areas and fleet parking areas. 
Electric vehicle charging station, public. An EV charging station that is accessible to and available for use by the general public. 
Electric vehicle parking space. Any parking space that is clearly identified to be used exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle. 
Electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE). The conductors, including the ungrounded, grounded, and equipment grounding conductors, and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment plugs, and all other fittings, devices, power outlets, or apparatus installed specifically for the purpose of transferring energy between the premises wiring and the electric vehicle. 
Electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) infrastructure. The equipment, as defined by the National Electrical Code, which is provided to support future electric vehicle charging. This shall include, but not be limited to: the design load placed on electrical panels and service equipment to support the additional electrical demand, the panel capacity to support additional feeder/branch circuits, the installation of raceways, both underground and surface mounted, to support the electrical vehicle supply equipment. 
Equipment compound. An area surrounding or near the base of a wireless support structure within which are located wireless communication facilities. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.433), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-07-02, § I(Attch.), 7-23-2019; Ord. No. 2022-05-03, § I, 5-24-2022; Ord. No. 2023-01-05, 1-24-2023)
Sec. 27-1364. Terms beginning with "F".
Fall zone. The area in which a wireless support structure may be expected to fall in the event of a structural failure, as measured by engineering standards. 
Family. See "household." 
Fence. An enclosure or barrier, constructed of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal or other manufactured material or combination of materials and erected to enclose, screen or separate areas, but not including hedges, shrubs, trees, or other natural growth. 
Fenestration. The arrangement, proportioning, and design of windows and doors in a building. 
Floodplain, 100-year. Land within the 100-year flood elevation, as defined in chapter 14. 
Flood hazard district. As defined in chapter 14. 
Floodway. As defined in chapter 14. 
Floor area. See section 27-1334. 
Frontage, lot or street. See section 27-1332. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.434), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1365. Terms beginning with "G".
General building. A building that accommodates residential, office, service or employment uses or a combination of such uses. 
Geothermal heat exchange system. Equipment that exchanges thermal energy between the ground (or a water source) and a building. This includes vertical closed loop, horizontal closed loop, water body closed loop system and open loop systems. Also known as ground source heat pumps and geothermal heat pumps. 
Grade, average. The average (mean) elevation of the ground along a line determined by dividing the sum of the elevation of the highest point on the line and the elevation of the lowest point on the line by two. 
Grade, existing. The elevation of the ground surface before development. 
Grade, finished. The final grade of the ground surface after development. 
Ground-Story (or floor) level. The lowest level of a building that is at or above grade for at least 50 percent of its interior floor-to-ceiling height. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.435), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1366. Terms beginning with "H".
Height. See section 27-1338. 
Historic. A building, structure, site or district identified as historic by the city council or the city historic preservation society, the comprehensive plan, by listing on the state register of historic places or the National Register of Historic Places, by listing as a national historic landmark, or determined potentially eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or as a result of review under section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended. 
Home occupation. An accessory use of a dwelling unit for business or commercial purposes. Home occupations are subject to the regulations of section 27-700. 
Household. A person living alone, or any of the following groups living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit who have established ties and familiarity with one other, who jointly use common areas, and who share meals, household activities, expenses, and responsibilities: 
(1)	Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship, foster or other duly-authorized custodial relationship; 
(2)	A maximum of four unrelated persons; or 
(3)	Two unrelated persons and any parents or children related to either. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.436), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1367. Terms beginning with "I".
Industrial district. See article IV. 
Inoperable vehicle. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of seven days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or in which the engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise modified so that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" does not include a motor vehicle that has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power, solely to perform ordinary service or repair operations. 
Intermodal freight terminal. An industrial establishment in which freight is transferred in containerized form from truck to railroad cars for transportation. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.437), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1368. Terms beginning with "J—Reserved.
Sec. 27-1369. Terms beginning with "K".
Kiosk. A freestanding structure upon which temporary information and/or posters, notices, and announcements are posted. 
Kitchen facilities. A room used to prepare food containing, at a minimum, a sink and a stove or oven. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.439), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1370. Terms beginning with "L".
Land use. A manner in which land is occupied or utilized. 
Lawfully established. A use, structure, lot or other feature (as the context indicates) that was established in conformance with all applicable zoning ordinance regulations in effect at the time of its establishment. 
Light trespass. Illumination that is emitted into an unintended area. 
Livestock. Domestic animals and fowl customarily kept on a farm including horses, mules, donkeys, cows, cattle, sheep, goats, ducks, geese and turkeys. 
Local street. A street identified by the Comprehensive Transportation Plan as a local street. 
Lot. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land lawfully established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Lot, buildable area of. The portion of a lot remaining after required setbacks have been met. Buildings may be located within any portion of the buildable area of a lot, except that if there are lot coverage limitations that exceed the area in required setbacks, the remaining required open space shall be provided within the buildable area of the lot. 
Lot, conforming. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land that meets the lot area, lot width, lot frontage and access requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
Lot, corner. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
Lot, double-frontage. A lot that abuts two parallel streets or that abuts two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. A double-frontage lot may also be referred to as a through lot. 
Lot, interior. A lot, other than a corner lot, abutting only one street. 
Lot frontage. The distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Lot line, front. The boundary of a lot that abuts the street. Unless otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance, the community development director is authorized to determine which line is the front lot line on corner lots. 
Lot line, street. The boundary of a lot that abuts a street. A lot may have more than one street lot line, and a street lot line may also be a front lot line. 
Lot line, rear. The boundary of a lot that is most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line. 
Lot line, side. Any boundary of a lot that is not a street lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot width. See section 27-1331. 
Lot line. Any boundary of a lot. 
Low-impact development (LID). An approach to land development (or redevelopment) that works with nature to manage storm-water as close to its source as possible. LID employs principles such as preserving and recreating natural landscape features, minimizing impervious area to create functional and appealing site drainage features that treat stormwater as a resource rather than a waste product. Common LID practices include bioretention facilities, rain gardens, green roofs, rain barrels or cisterns, and permeable paving. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.440), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1371. Terms beginning with "M".
Multi-tenant development. A nonresidential development typically under unified ownership and control consisting of two or more business establishments, which may be on the same lot or on separate lots. The tenants of multi-tenant development typically share vehicle access and parking facilities. 
Multi-unit building. A building occupied by multiple dwelling units, all of which are located on a single lot, which may be occupied by more than one multi-unit building. The dwelling units are attached and may be located on separate floors or side-by-side. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.441), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1372. Terms beginning with "N".
Neighborhood. An area of the city within which residents share a commonality of interests including distinct physical design and street layout patterns, a shared developmental history, distinct housing types, or boundaries defined by physical barriers such as major roads and railroads or natural features such as creeks or rivers. 
Node. A concentration of population, retail, and employment within a well-defined area that has a diverse mix of land uses and a pedestrian and transit orientation. 
Nonconforming development feature. See article XII, division 5 of this chapter. 
Nonconforming lot. See article XII, division 2 of this chapter. 
Nonconforming use. See article XII, division 4 of this chapter. 
Nonconforming structure. See article XII, division 3 of this chapter. 
Nonconformity. A nonconforming lot, nonconforming use, nonconforming structure, nonconforming development feature or nonconforming sign. 
Nonresidential building. Any principal building other than a residential building. 
Nonresidential development. All commercial, office, institutional, industrial and similar uses, other than household living or group living uses. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.442), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1373. Terms beginning with "O".
Occupied space. Building floor that is designed for and intended to be occupied by customers and employees. Storage areas, utility spaces, parking spaces and similar areas are not considered "occupied space>" 
Open-air uses. Uses of land that do not involve buildings or that involve buildings that are incidental and accessory to the open-air use of the lot. Typical examples include storage yards, vehicle impound yards, junk yards and salvage yard uses. 
Outdoor customer seating/dining area. The area of all unenclosed areas used or intended to be used for seating and dining by customers and guests, including standing table areas. 
Overlay district. A zoning district that over-lays one or more base zoning districts and imposes requirements in addition to those of the base district or relaxes or modifies the regulations otherwise applicable in the base zoning district. 
Outdoor storage. The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Overstory tree or large tree means trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet and a mature branch spread of 1,600 square feet or more. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.443), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2022-12-03, § I, 12-13-2022)
Sec. 27-1374. Terms beginning with "P".
Parapet or parapet wall. A wall-like barrier at the edge of a roof that acts as a vertical extension of an exterior building wall extending above the roof height of the building. Parapets may serve as a safety or architectural feature. 
Parking garage. A covered or sheltered structure designed, constructed and used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Parking lot. Any area designed for temporary storage of motor vehicles in normal operating condition, regardless if whether or a fee is charged. 
Paved. An area that is covered by asphalt, concrete, pervious pavers, or a similar material approved by the community development director. 
Permitted use. A use identified by this zoning ordinance as permitted as-of-right in the subject zoning district. 
Pitch, roof. The ratio of the rise to the run on a roof. 
Portable storage container. Any non-motorized vehicle, trailer or fully enclosed container intended for the temporary storage of items until relocated to another location or a long-term storage facility. Storage containers include, but are not limited to PODS, Pack-Rats and similar containers. 
Principal use. The primary or predominant use of any lot. 
Principal structure. The building in which the principal use is located. 
Private drive. A street that provides for vehicular circulation within a single legal lot of record, which is not dedicated to the city, and which is not maintained by the city. 
Private restrictive covenants. Private restrictions on the use of land or structures imposed by private contract, such as subdivision covenants. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.444), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1375. Terms beginning with "Q".
Quasi-judicial officers, boards, or agencies. An officer, board, or agency appointed by a local government to exercise delegated, quasi-judicial zoning powers including hearing appeals of administrative decisions by such officers, boards, or agencies and hearing and rendering decisions on applications for variances, special exceptions, special land use permits, or other similar permits not enumerated herein as a zoning decision, pursuant to standards for the exercise of such quasi-judicial authority adopted by Chapter 27 Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-06, § I, 6-28-2023
Sec. 27-1376. Terms beginning with "R".
Rainwater harvesting equipment. A rain barrel, cistern or similar container that collects and stores rainwater or other water that would otherwise be lost as runoff. 
Recreational vehicle. Any motorized or nonmotorized vehicle that is intended for personal recreational use and not intended for daily transportation. Such vehicles include Class A and C motor homes, campervans, bus conversions, boats, military surplus vehicles, all terrain vehicles (ATVs), and similar vehicles intended for recreational purposes. Pickup trucks with a fully enclosed bed that are used for daily transportation are not considered recreational vehicles. 
Residential building. A detached house, attached house, duplex or other building containing residential dwelling units. 
Residential district. See article II. 
Residential housing project. One or more buildings that collectively contain ten or more new or additional dwelling units on one or more lots or parcels under common ownership or control, including contiguous parcels. A "residential housing project" may be developed in one or more phases and may consist of new construction, rehabilitation, or the conversion of rental housing to condominiums. In determining whether a development constitutes a residential housing project, the community development director shall consider all relevant factors, including whether the development is marketed as a single or unified project, shares common elements, or is a phase of a larger development. The definition of "residential housing project" shall be interpreted broadly to promote the provision of workforce housing and to prevent evasion of the workforce housing requirements of this chapter. 
Residential use. Occupancy of a building and land for human habitation. 
Retaining wall. A structure constructed and erected between lands of different elevations. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.446), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1377. Terms beginning with "S".
Satellite television antenna. An apparatus capable of receiving but not transmitting television, radio, or cable communications from a central device transmitting such communications. 
Screening fence. An opaque structure designed to provide a visual barrier constructed of materials including wood, chain link with wood or plastic inserts, metal, vinyl, plastic and other such materials as may be approved by the community development director. 
Setback. The minimum distance by which a building or structure shall be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line. See also section 27-1336. 
Shopfront building. A building situated near the front property line, with parking located at the rear or in small parking lots located to the side of the building. Shopfront buildings have front-facing building entrances and a high-level of transparency at the ground-floor level. Upper levels of multi-story shopfront buildings are typically occupied by residential dwelling units or by office or service uses, as allowed by the subject zoning district. 
Site plan. That plan required to acquire a development, construction or building permit that shows the means by which the developer will conform with applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances. 
Solar energy system. A system intended to convert solar energy into thermal, mechanical or electrical energy. 
Solar energy system, building-integrated. A solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural part of the building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights, shading devices and similar architectural components. 
Solar energy system, structure-mounted. A solar energy system that is mounted on the façade or roof of either a principal or accessory structure. 
Solar energy system, flush-mounted. A solar energy system that is mounted flush with a finished building surface, at no more than six inches in height above that surface. 
Solar energy system, ground-mounted. A solar energy system mounted on the ground and not attached to any other structure other than structural supports. 
Solar Panel. A group of photovoltaic cells assembled on a panel. Panels are assembled on-site into solar arrays. 
Special land use permit. See article X, division 3 of this chapter. 
Story. See section 27-1338. 
Street, arterial. See "arterial street." 
Street, collector. See "collector street." 
Street, local. See "local street." 
Street, public. Any right-of-way set aside for public travel deeded to the city and any right-of-way that has been accepted as a street for maintenance by the city. 
Street right-of-way line (or right-of-way line). The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a street right-of-way. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. 
Structure, accessory. See "accessory structure." 
Substantial modification (to a wireless communication facility). The mounting of a proposed wireless communication facility on a wireless support structure that substantially changes the physical dimensions of the support structure. A mounting is presumed to be a substantial modification if it meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)	Increases the existing vertical height of the wireless support structure by (a) more than ten percent, or the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; 
(2)	Adds an appurtenance to the body of a wireless support structure that protrudes horizontally from the edge of the wireless support structure more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the wireless support structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater (except where necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable); 
(3)	Increases the square footage of an existing equipment compound by more than 2,500 square feet. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.447), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1378. Terms beginning with "T".
Territorial boundaries. The area lying within the corporate limits of the City of Brookhaven. 
Three-flat building. A building occupied by three dwelling units, all of which are located on a single lot that is not occupied by other principal buildings. The three dwelling units are attached and may be located on separate floors or side-by-side. 
Threshold. The top of the subfloor in the opening that is designated as the front door of a dwelling. 
Top plate. The horizontal timber directly carrying the trusses of a roof or the rafters. 
Trailer. Any non-motorized vehicle or wheeled attachment designed to be towable, including landscape utility trailers, horse trailers, storage trailers, campers, recreational vehicle trailers, trailers designed for temporary living quarters while traveling or camping, fifth-wheel trailers, travel trailers, pop-up campers, transport trailers and boat trailers. 
Tree. Any self-supporting woody plant that usually provides one main trunk and produces a more or less distinct and elevated head with branches. 
Tree canopy. The area directly beneath the crown and within the outermost edges of the branches and leaves of a tree. 
Truck. A motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
Two-flat building. A building occupied by two dwelling units, both of which are located on a single lot that is not occupied by other principal buildings. The two dwelling units are attached and may be located on separate floors or side-by-side. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.448), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-06, § I, 6-28-2023)
Sec. 27-1379. Terms beginning with "U".
Usable satellite signals. Satellite signals from all major communications satellites that, when viewed on a conventional television set, are at least equal in picture quality to those received from local commercial television stations by way of cable television. 
Use. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.449), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1380. Terms beginning with "V".
Variance. Permission to depart from strict compliance with applicable zoning ordinance requirements, pursuant to article X, division 6 of this chapter. 
Vehicle fuels, alternative. Electricity, CNG (compressed natural gas), LNG (liquefied natural gas), LPG (liquefied petroleum gas), and hydrogen. 
Vehicle fuels, conventional. Gasoline and diesel fuel. 
Viewshed. The total area visible from an identified observation position. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.450), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1381. Terms beginning with "W".
Wall, masonry. An enclosure or barrier, constructed of brick, stone, concrete, concrete block or other aggregate material and erected to enclose, screen or separate areas. 
Wall, retaining. A structure constructed and erected between lands of different elevations to protect structures or prevent erosion and located outside the buildable area of a lot (within required setback areas). 
Wall, wing. A wall that is part of or structurally attached to a building's foundation and located within the buildable area of a lot (outside of required building setbacks). 
Walk-up building. A small, non-elevator building occupied by multiple dwelling units, all of which are located on a single lot that is not occupied by other principal buildings. The dwelling units are attached and may be located on separate floors or side-by-side. 
Workforce housing. For-sale or rental housing units that are affordable to those households earning no more than 80 percent of the median household income for the Atlanta MSA, as determined by the current fiscal year HUD income limit table. 
Workspace building. A modified, more flexible form of the general building type. Workspace buildings are primarily intended to accommodate warehouse, light industrial and heavy service uses. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.451), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1382. Terms beginning with "X"—Reserved.
Sec. 27-1383. Terms beginning with "Y".
Yard. The actual (as opposed to "required") open, unoccupied space that exists on a lot between a building and a lot line. 
Yard, front. A yard extending the full width of the lot (between the side lot lines) between the principal building and the street right-of-way. 
Yard, interior side. A yard extending between the front yard and the rear yard between the principal building and the adjacent side lot line. 
Yard, rear. A yard extending the full width of the lot (between the side lot lines) between the principal building and the rear lot line. 
Yard, street side. A yard extending between the front yard and the rear yard between the principal building and the adjacent street side lot line. 
Yard, street. Any yard abutting a street. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.453), 11-27-2018)
Sec. 27-1384. Terms beginning with "Z".
Zoning. The power of local governments to provide within their respective territorial boundaries for the zoning or districting of property for various uses and the prohibition of other or different uses within such zones or districts and for the regulation of development and the improvement of real estate within such zones or districts in accordance with the uses of property for which such zones or districts were established. 
Zoning decision. Final legislative action by a local government which results in: 
(1)	The adoption or repeal of a zoning ordinance. 
(2)	The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which changes the text of the zoning ordinance. 
(3)	The adoption or denial of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which rezones property from one zoning classification to another. 
(4)	The adoption or denial of an amendment to a zoning ordinance by a municipal local government which zones property to be annexed into the municipality. 
(5)	The grant or denial of a permit relating to a special use of property. 
(6)	The grant or denial of a variance or conditions concurrent and in conjunction with a decision pursuant to subparagraphs (1) or (5) of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, Exh. A(27.454), 11-27-2018; Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-06, § I, 6-28-2023)
￼Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2019-05-06, § I(Attch.), adopted May 28, 2019, changed the title of Div. 2 from "Construction Board of Appeals" to "Variances and Appeals," as set out herein. ￼Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-08-06, § I, adopted Aug. 22, 2017, amended div. 4 and in so doing changed the title of said division from "Certificate of Occupancy or Tenancy" to Certificate of Occupancy," as set out herein. ￼Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2021-06-03, § I(Attch.), adopted June 29, 2021, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 14-47—14-52, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to tree preservation and maintenance and derived from Ord. No. 2014-07-07, adopted Aug. 26, 2014; Ord. No. 2015-02-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-08-01, adopted Aug. 25, 2015; Ord. No. 2017-08-07, § I, adopted Aug. 22, 2017; and Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), adopted May 28, 2019. ￼Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), adopted Sept. 8, 2020, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 14-78—14-84, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to stormwater management and derived from Ord. No. 2014-12-05, § 2(14-40), adopted Dec. 16, 2014; Ord. No. 2016-03-02, § 1, adopted March 22, 2016; and Ord. No. 2019-05-07, § I(Attch.), adopted May 28, 2019. ￼Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2020-09-02, § I(Attch.), adopted Sept. 8, 2020, repealed Art. V, §§ 14-108—14-117, which pertained to water quality control and derived from Ord. No. 2014-12-05, §§ 2(14-42), 2(14-43), adopted Dec. 16, 2014. ￼Ord. No. 2016-01-02, adopted January 12, 2016, repealed the former article VII, §§ 16-151—16-159, and enacted a new article VII as set out herein. The former article VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2014-05-11, §§ 16-302—16-310, 5-11-2014. ￼Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-11-03, § 2, adopted Nov. 28, 2017, repealed Art. V, §§ 18-135—18-139, which pertained to false alarms and derived from Ord. No. 2014-03-01, §§ 16-61-16-65, adopted March 25, 2014. Provisions pertaining to alarm systems can be found in Ch. 11, Art. II. ￼Ord. No. 2024-11-04, § 1, adopted Nov., 19, 2024, amended the title of Art. II to read as herein set out. The former Art. II title pertained to Street Lighting Standards. ￼Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2019-08-01, § 2, adopted July 23, 2019, repealed art. VII, §§ 23-163—23-175, and reenacted a new article, §§ 23-163—23-178, as set out herein. Former art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2018-12-02, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2018. ￼Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, § I, adopted Nov. 27, 2018, amended Ch. 27, Zoning, in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter as set out herein. Formerly, Ch. 27 had been adopted by Ord. No. 2014-09-03, § I, adopted Sept. 23, 2014 and amended by Ord. No. 2015-04-02, § 1, adopted April 21, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-06-08A, § I(27-556), adopted June 16, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-06-09, § I(27-486), adopted June 16, 2015; Ordrz. No. 2016-01-01, § I(Att.), adopted Jan. 12, 2016; Ord. No. 2017-05-01, § I, adopted May 23, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-05-02, § I, adopted May 23, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-06-01, § I, adopted June 29, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-08-02, § I, adopted Aug. 22, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-08-03, § I, adopted Aug. 22, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-08-04, § I, adopted Aug. 22, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-08-05, § I, adopted Aug. 22, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-09-03, § I, adopted Sept. 26, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-09-04, § I, adopted Sept. 26, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-11-04, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2017; Ord. No. RZ-2017-12-04, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2017; Ord. No. RZ-2017-12-05, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2017; Ord. No. 2018-01-03, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 23, 2018; and Ord. No. 2018-04-04, adopted April 24, 2018. ￼Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. RZ2023-12-10, § I, adopted December 19, 2023, repealed the former div. 7, §§ 27-133, 27-134, and enacted a new div. 7 as set out herein. The former div. 7 pertained to backyard cottages and derived from Ord. No. RZ-2018-11-06, §§ I, Exh. A(27.33), I, Exh. A(27.34), adopted Nov. 27, 2018. ￼Editor's note(s)—(Ord. No. RZ-2023-06-08, § I, adopted June 28, 2023, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 27-547—27-549. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 27-540—27-542. ￼Editor's note(s)—The residential use category includes uses that provide for long-term residential occupancy by individual households or by groups of people. ￼Editor's note(s)—The public and civic use category includes public, quasi-public, civic and institutional uses. ￼Editor's note(s)—The commercial use category includes uses that provide a business service or involve the selling, leasing or renting of merchandise to the general public. The commercial use subcategories are as follows. ￼Ord. No. 2024-02-01, § I, adopted February 27, 2024, amended div. 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out, adding provisions for data processing, as § 27-647; and renumbering §§ 27-647—27-650, as 27-648—27-651. Former div. 7, pertained to similar subject matter; the historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
Editor's note(s)—The industrial use category includes uses that produce goods from extracted materials or from recyclable or previously prepared materials, including the design, storage and handling of these products and the materials from which they are produced. It also includes uses that store or distribute materials or goods in large quantities and uses involved in basic industrial processes. ￼Editor's note(s)—The agricultural use category includes community garden uses. ￼Editor's note(s)—The wireless communication use category includes wireless communication facilities and wireless support structures. ￼Editor's note(s)—This category includes uses that do not fit the other use categories. ￼Editor's note(s)—Accessible parking facilities (for persons with disabilities) shall be provided in accordance with Georgia law. ￼Editor's note(s)—See article VII, division 2 for a description of the use categorization system used in this zoning ordinance and for use-type definitions. 